

<!-- PAGE 1 -->

Content Soft Computing 142 (2023) 113046

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Applied Soft Computing

journal homepage: 
[www.elsevier.com/locate/asc](http://www.elsevier.com/locate/asc)

ELSEVIER

# Ranking loss and sequestering learning for reducing image search bias in histopathology

Pooria Mazaheri
^a^
, Azam Asilian Bidgoli
^a^
, Shahryar Rahnamayan
^a^
, H.R. Tizhoos
^b,*^

^a^
 NAK Lab, Ontario Tech University, Oshawa, Canada

^b^
 Khazar Lab, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA

ARTICLE INFO

**Article history:**
Received 10 August 2022
Received in revised form 14 November 2022
Accepted 20 March 2023
Available online 30 April 2023

**Keywords:**
Bias sequestering
Histopathology
Image search
Loss function
Deep neural network
Efficiency

**ABSTRACT**

Recently, deep learning has started to play an essential role in healthcare applications, including image search in digital pathology. Despite the recent progress in computer vision, significant issues remain for image searching in histopathology archives. A well-known problem is AI bias and lack of generalization. A more particular shortcoming of deep models is the ignorance toward search functionality. The former affects every model, be it the latter only search and matching. Due to the lack of ranking-based learning, researchers must train models based on the classification error and then use the resultant embedding for image search purposes. Moreover, deep models appear to be prone to internal bias even if using a large image repository of various hospitals. This paper proposes two novel ideas to improve image search performance first, we use a ranking loss function to guide feature extraction toward the matching-oriented nature of the search. By forcing the model to learn the ranking of matched outputs, the representation learning is customized toward image search instead of learning a class label. Second, we introduce the concept of sequestering learning to enhance the generalization of feature extraction. By sequestering the image of the input hospital from the matched output, i.e., sequestering the input domain, the institutional bias is reduced. The proposed ideas are implemented and validated through the largest public dataset of whole slide images. The experiments demonstrate superior results compared to the state-of-art.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (
[http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
).

## 1. Introduction

As digital pathology finds its way into the clinical workflow, there is no suitable provision to access the stored images in archives of whole slides images (WSIs) to make them available to researchers and pathologists for diagnostic and educational purposes. This obstacle in computational pathology is mainly due to the lack of compact and generalizable WSI representations [1]. Additionally, working with WSIs is faced with various critical challenges, among others, gigapixel image sizes resulting in expensive processing time and lack of expertly annotated images at the pixel level. As a result, most approaches focus on the unsupervised processing of WSI patches to address these limitations. The detailed abbreviations and definitions used in the paper are listed in Table 1.

Deep learning has been applied to the challenging task of content-based image search in histopathology, a complex task requiring salient, discriminative, and representative features [2,3]. These features that should be descriptive of the image content can be extracted by a feature extractor, commonly a deep network [4]. For this purpose, images are fed into a model, and the output of a specific layer is then utilized for image representation [5]. The idea of content-based image search is to compare a feature extracted from a query image to all WSIs in a database in a computationally efficient manner and find the most similar matches [6,7]. The results can allow researchers to match records of current and past patients, learn from evidently diagnosed and treated cases. Through the information obtained from retrieving similar instances, physicians can hone their initial diagnosis, better understand the patient's prognosis, and eventually devise an accurate final diagnostic interpretation when integrated with ancillary data. However, researchers must train the models based on the classification labels and then use the features to search images. This inconsistency between the model's primary objective (i.e., classification) and the model's downstream task (i.e., search), leads to adverse effects on the results.

In addition to the issue mentioned above, data bias is another major challenge that should be addressed before integrating deep models into the clinical routine. Bias in medical studies can be analyzed along with three directions: data-driven, algorithmic, and human bias [8]. Data-driven bias means most fields of human research are heavily based toward participants and may not be

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: 
[tzhoos@hastipatients.org](mailto:tzhoos@hastipatients.org)
 (H.R. Tizhoos).

[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2023.113046](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2023.113046)

1568-4946/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (
[http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
).

<!-- PAGE 2 -->

Manuel A. Alba, Ridgely S. Rohmeyer et al.

Preprint. Under review.

Table 1
Abbreviations used in the paper.

| Abbreviation | Definition |
| --- | --- |
| TCGA | The Cancer Genome Atlas |
| WISI | Weakly Supervised Image Search |
| TCCA | The Cancer Genome Atlas |
| WISI | Weakly Supervised Image Search |
| MS | Multiple instance learning |
| WISI | Weakly Supervised Image Search |
| CMN | Convolutional Neural Network |
| WISI | Weakly Supervised Image Search |
| IS | Instance sequencing learning |

representative of the human population as a whole. Algorithmic bias means that when an algorithm is trained on biased data, it is likely to reinforce patterns from the dominant class of the data. Finally, human bias may be reflected by human designs of deep models. These types of biases can lead to a lack of generalization and hence misdiagnoses in digital pathology. Due to the propensity of data mining to overfit to the training data, generalization and performance are typically reported in a reserved testing set or evaluated using cross-validation techniques [8, 9]. In contrast, [3–6, 11] However, the overfitting of digital pathology models to their training data is a well-known problem that has been widely and frequently accounted for in the internal validation of models.

Recently, it has been shown that there are tissue source site-specific patterns of public archives like TCGA images that could potentially contribute to the bias of any deep learning model training [12], this is clear evidence of existing bias in the images. It seems that WISI provided by some institutions may have unique but hidden identifiers that could reveal which institution has shared the data. Consequently, deep models may be trained on top of these patterns without explicit training on fine-tuning. The features of a pre-trained DenseNet can almost perfectly match WISI that originated from some hospitals [12]. In addition, a trained model for the classification of cancer subtypes may be able to discover such tissue source site-specific patterns within different slides by classifying them. These findings imply that the trained deep model may have learned to distinguish between institutions as a form of bias and be considered shortcut to classify cancer types. Generally, this bias affects other chained operations, such as segmentation and classification [13].

To avoid learning the site-specific patterns of institutions, we require to exclude the participation of images from the same institution during the learning. However, the nature of existing classification-based loss functions does not facilitate this idea’s implementation. Hence, we propose a novel loss function to train the model based on the similarity among images. Then, we sequence the input hospital at the loss function level by proposing a modified version of the ranking loss function.

The paper is structured as follows: Section 3 briefly covers the related work. Section 4 is a brief overview of the architecture and backbone model and the TCGA repository as our public dataset. Section 5 covers the approach to mitigate bias and results are reported in Section 6. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

2. Related works

**Machine Learning in Digital Pathology.**
 In recent years, with the continuous advancement of digital pathology in clinics and laboratories, many research works have proposed to capture the image data [14] and process it [15]. For example, [16] is a sizable number of WISI is being accumulated, many studies have analyzed WISI using computer vision and machine learning to assist in tasks including diagnosis and prognosis [14, 15]. However, we are generally faced with lack of effective and expressive techniques for representing WISI. The characterization of WISI is a challenging task due to the complexity of image content, variability and complexity, and definitiveness of diagnosis at the WSI level. In addition, many efforts are dedicated to annotating a large number of images [1]. All these challenges need more novel ways of representing WISI [16, 17].

**Content-based Image Search.**
 In general, image search and retrieval require representative features that are descriptive of image content. In order to achieve this, researchers employ two types of networks. Some of them utilize the pre-trained deep neural networks (DNNs), as in [18], or learn the features [8] like the ImageNet dataset [19], while others prefer to fine-tune or train a DNN on pathology images [20, 21]. Narayan et al. [22] used a pre-trained DNN that was trained on natural images to condense an input image into a feature vector. They adopted a dataset annotated by pathologists and reported top-5 scores for patch-based search at various magnification levels. In another research, Kala et al. [23] introduced a semi-supervised learning method for the classification of WSI. They utilized an unsupervised color-based clustering method to extract the features from the WSI and then classify each WSI. This set of patches is called the “mosaic” of WSI. The “mosaic” is then used to train a pre-trained model to extract features. Then, the extracted features are barcoded to create a “bunch” barcode for each WSI. Finally, the barcoded WSI is represented by WISI enables Vottroid to perform millions of searches in real-time. In [24], the authors proposed a method to represent WSI representation for search in digital pathology. They re-trained a model called Kümmerer based on DenseNet topology at several magnifications using a collected dataset from the TCGA. They adopted a clustering-based approach to select histopathology images at 200x magnification based on their color content. The Kümmerer reported two types of image search, horizontal search and vertical search. The horizontal search is based on the search across the entire dataset to find the WSI with a similar tumor type to the query WSI among all WISI. In contrast, in vertical search, the search is limited to find the types of WSI with the same anatomical site, i.e., search for similar WSI with the similar tumor type among all WSI with the same anatomical site.

**Bias in Digital Medicine.**
 In a recent study, Howard et al. [24] highlighted the potential bias in the use of AI in digital medicine, such as survival and gene expression patterns, remarkably different among samples provided by various clinics and laboratories. They showed that some deep learning models are capable of predicting prognosis or mutation status. Many works have been conducted to mitigate the bias in deep learning models by validating the validity of histologic image analysis, some through correcting for differences in slide staining between institutions [14]. Some of them tried to utilize the proposed methods by Keras and Keras [25, 26] to decrease color variation across images. In [27], the authors proposed a method to mitigate the bias, where color channels are altered at random during training to prevent a model from overfitting to the color of a specific slide. Most research works of stain-normalization and augmentation techniques have focused on the performance of models in validation sets, rather than on the generalization of the site-specific bias that may lead to model bias [28, 29]. In addition, bias may exist in the medical images themselves. In [30], the authors proposed the trained models on radiographic images are more likely to learn the bias of the training data. Finally, in [31], the authors highlighted the data acquisition, instead of the actual underlying pathology.

In [32], the authors revealed that an approach may be subject to bias if the features extracted from the images are biased. Hence, datasets and potential hidden biases are not accounted for. The factors such as scanner configuration and noise, stain variation

<!-- PAGE 3 -->

Figure 1 shows a diagram illustrating the extraction of patches from an extracted patch (A) to create a mosaic (B), and then randomly choosing one part (C). The diagram shows a large image (A) with a red arrow pointing to a smaller extracted patch (B), and a red arrow pointing from B to a small square (C).

**Figure 1.**
 Extracted patches from a whole-slide image (A), created a mosaic from extracted patches (B), and randomly choose one part from B25 parts for feeding to the network (C).

and artifacts, and source site patient demographics are more likely potential reasons for the observed biases [12]. The purpose of this work is not to discover the source of bias. We propose two novel ideas to reduce bias and improve the generalization of deep features for image search. We extend the loss function to consider ranking of matching images. As well, we exclude the images belonging to the input hospital from majority voting to retrieve candidates.

### 3. Data & Model preparations

**Image Dataset.**
 The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) is a joint effort of the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) that molecularly characterizes tissue samples of more than 13,000 patients along with the primary diagnosis. It contains histopathology whole slide images (WSIs) of 32 cancer subtypes across 25 primary sites. The WSIs in the TCGA dataset are associated with metadata such as primary diagnosis, tumor stage, and medical center. This repository is used in various deep learning researches that follow different goals such as cancer type classification [32–35], somatic mutation prediction [32,36,37], tissue segmentation [38,39], and survival estimation [35,40].

There are many researches that focus on the TCGA [32,41] and implement and propose different models on it such as deep semi-supervised learning [42], Liao et al. [32] constructed a CNN-based platform using WSIs of hematoxylin and eosin stained digital slides obtained from the TCGA dataset to prediction of somatic mutation. In another research, Shao et al. [41] proposed a new framework called correlated Multiple instance learning (MIL). MIL is considered a powerful tool to address the weakly supervised classification in WSIs based pathology diagnosis. However, the existing MIL methods are usually based on identical and independent distribution hypothesis while neglecting the correlation among various instances. Therefore, the authors devised a Transformer based MIL that explored both spatial and morphological information and can effectively deal with unbalanced and multiple classification with great visualization and interpretability. They succeeded to achieve faster convergence and better performance over the TCGA dataset.

**Deep Topology Backbone.**
 During the last years, developing the convolutional neural network has attracted the attention of many researchers [43]. According to the recent success of CNNs and amazing architecture of human spine, Song and Kohli et al. [44] proposed a new DNN architecture with gradual inputs called SpinNetAI to achieve higher accuracy with fewer computations.

In this network, they split each layer into three splits that lead to reducing the number of weights. In addition, they illustrated the effectiveness of their proposed model on several public datasets leading to the enhancement of the classification accuracy and regression error. Researchers develop convolutional neural networks (CNNs) at a fixed resource cost and then scale up the network to obtain better accuracy. In order to scale the model, they arbitrarily increase depth [45] or width [46] or use a larger input image resolution [47]. Although their methods improve accuracy, usually require tedious manual tuning and often yield suboptimal performance. Tan and Le [48] proposed a model scaling method to scale up CNNs in a more structured manner to address these problems. Their method scales up each dimension with a fixed set of scaling coefficients. By utilizing this method, AutoML [49], Neural Architecture Search (NAS), and the intelligent and controlled expansion of the three dimensions (i.e., resolution, depth, and width) of an artificial neural network, they developed a family of models, called EfficientNets, which pass the state-of-the-art accuracy with better efficiency. EfficientNet is a CNN architecture that is commonly used in computer vision due to their high performance in feature learning. There are eight CNN models in the EfficientNet family, including EfficientNet-B0–EfficientNet-BX— the higher index indicates the model has a larger network size. Later, the EfficientNet models were commonly used in several studies for medical image processing. Gupta and Manhas [50] in 2021 proposed a model based on EfficientNet-B3 topology that can efficiently detect oral cancer in histopathology images. Sun et al. [51] proposed a model based on the EfficientNet-B6 architecture for histopathologic cancer detection. They applied different activation functions as well as different optimization algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent to analyze their effects on diagnosis accuracy. In another research, Wang et al. [52] proposed a boosted EfficientNet model to diagnose the presence of cancer based on pathological tissue of breast cancers. This model helped them alleviate the small image resolution problem, which frequently occurs in medical imaging. Therefore, based on the EfficientNet’s ability to diagnose cancer and pass the state-of-the-art accuracy with better efficiency, we choose EfficientNet-B0 as a base model for our experiments.

### 4. Methodology

The novelty of this research work is based on two ideas to address two independent but often concerning challenges in image search: non-search oriented representations inadequate for

<!-- PAGE 4 -->

Figure 1: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 2: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 3: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 4: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 5: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 6: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 7: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 8: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 9: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 10: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 11: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 12: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 13: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 14: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 15: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 16: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 17: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 18: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 19: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 20: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 21: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 22: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 23: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 24: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 25: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 26: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 27: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 28: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 29: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 30: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 31: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 32: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 33: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 34: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 35: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 36: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 37: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 38: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 39: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 40: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 41: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 42: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 43: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 44: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 45: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 46: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 47: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 48: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 49: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 50: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 51: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 52: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 53: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 54: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 55: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 56: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 57: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 58: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 59: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 60: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 61: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 62: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 63: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 64: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 65: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 66: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 67: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 68: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 69: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 70: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 71: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.

Figure 72: Overall structure of training process. Firstly, sub-patches are randomly selected from patches and fed to the EfficientNet model. Then, embedded vectors are extracted and paired to the RLF function to calculate the loss value and guide adjusting the weights.</p

<!-- PAGE 5 -->

Figure 3 shows the Bias Label Matrix B and the Inverse Bias Label Matrix B⁻¹. The Bias Label Matrix B is a 4x4 matrix with 1s on the diagonal and 0s elsewhere. The Inverse Bias Label Matrix B⁻¹ is also a 4x4 matrix with 1s on the diagonal and 0s elsewhere.

**Fig. 3.**
 The Bias Label Matrix B and the Inverse Bias Label Matrix B⁻¹. The columns show the hospitals, and the rows show the feature vectors. The number of rows is equal to the batch size, and the indices show the feature vector belonging to a specific hospital or not.

**Table 2.**
 Added layers to customize the EffiNet architecture for histopathology image classification. We added BN to normalize the input, dropout as a regularization technique, softmax function and three FC layers to change the size of last layer to the number of classes.

| Stage | FC | Resolution (W×H) | #Channels | #Layers |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 |  | 512 | 512 | 1 |
| 2 | BN(Dropout) | 777 | 1280 | 1 |
| 3 | BN(Dropout) | 388 | 1280 | 1 |
| 4 | FC(Sigmoid) | 1 | 128 | 1 |
| 5 | FC(Sigmoid) | 1 | 128 | 1 |

The feature vector of one patch and the columns representing the hospitals. The value of 1 for cell (B, j) shows that the i-th image belongs to the j-th hospital. This matrix should ascertain that two images from the same hospital should not vote for each other during training. In order to create this matrix, we modify the hospital labels to a one-hot vector.

**Fig. 3**
 illustrates an example for matrix B and B⁻¹ that is used to implement SL. In order to prevent the voting of same hospital, we flip the values and create the matrix 1-B. Now we use bias label matrix to create the similarity matrix S:

S = (1 - B) \cdot (1 - B)

**4.3. Architecture & training data**

**Deep Network**
 – We utilized a customized EffiNetNet network [53] to identify the primary diagnosis of histopathology images. The purpose, as seen in Table 2, is to add four layers to the EffiNetNet topology. Firstly, batch normalization (BN) is added to normalize the input of layers by re-centering and re-scaling [54]. In addition, dropout is employed as a regularization technique to control overfitting and to discourage learning an overly complex model [55]. Moreover, the softmax function and three Fully Connected (FC) layers have been added to accommodate the classification of cancer subtypes from TCGA (i.e., primary diagnosis). The number of class labels is two (LIUAD, LUAD) for the lung dataset and two (LGG, GBM) for the brain dataset. Also, non-monotonic (swish) activation [56] is chosen as an activation function since it is usually more efficient than ReLU [57].

**Patch Selection**
 – Since each WSI contains generally irrelevant pixel information, we need to use a method to remove them. Therefore, color threshold method was utilized to remove irrelevant regions. Accordingly, the proposed method in Yottvad was used to patch selection [23]. The method was implemented a “matrix” of each WSI. The mosaic is a rather small collection of patches to represent the entire WSI. In essence, Yottvad enables us to represent the entire WSI with a small collection of patches. Then, we removed all patches with low entropy by taking the top 20 percent of cellularity sorted patches [20]. [Fig. (A)] and (B) illustrates a sample of histopathology image with extracted patches and a created mosaic of high cellular patches.

**Grid strategy for training**
 – The customary purpose followed by researchers in training DNNs for digital pathology is to construct a model to discriminate histopathology images based on the primary diagnosis. For this purpose, a portion of data equal to batch size should be fed to the network for learning parameters and training. However, there are two crucial challenges for the development. Due to the large size of patches, high memory and memory are needed for preparing and feeding the data into the network. Additionally, the training process of the network can be time-consuming and take many hours, even days. The second challenge is that the size of the patches (i.e., 1000 × 1000 pixels) is different from the size of ImageNet samples that the original EffiNetNet is trained on. Therefore, we utilized the Grid method as an image cropping solution to address these challenges. For preparing training datasets, firstly, we mesh each image into 25 sub-patches, with a size of 224 × 224 pixels. Next, we randomly choose one of them and feed it to the network in each epoch during the training phase (Fig. (C)). At the next step, each randomly selected part is fed into a pre-trained EffiNetNet for feature extraction. Finally, the extracted features vector with dimension 1280 is passed to the RLF function for calculating loss value. This method can cover most parts of the original patches to feed the network since it chooses many times (i.e., epoch size) from 25 sub-patches.

**5. Experiments**

We conducted three series of experiments to assess the trained model, with and without considering the effect of bias on lung cancer brain datasets. First, we used the TCGA repository to use 1024 Lung patches from 81 WSIs, and 36,000 Brain patches from 74 WSIs. We have two main subtypes of Lung cancer, namely Lung Squamous Cell Carcinoma (LUSC) and Lung Adenocarcinoma (LUAD) that account for around 70% of all lung cancers [58]. Regarding these two main subtypes, it is a crucial step in building computerized decision support and triaging systems. The Brain cancer dataset contains two subtypes, namely Lower-Grade Glioma (LGG) and Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).

We run training/fine-tuning in several configurations to validate the RLF and SL. We used training data with a batch size of 64 for 20 epochs. The network was initialized with pre-trained weights of the ImageNet model. We used the Adam optimizer. In order to evaluate the performance of our method, we use F1-score [25,59] and is calculated as the harmonic mean of the precision and recall:

F1\text{-score} = 2 \times \frac{\text{Precision} \times \text{Recall}}{\text{Precision} + \text{Recall}} \quad (6)

where

\text{Precision} = \frac{\text{TruePositive}}{\text{TruePositive} + \text{FalsePositive}} \quad (7)

and

\text{Recall} = \frac{\text{TruePositive}}{\text{TruePositive} + \text{FalseNegative}} \quad (7)

**5.1. Evaluation of ranking loss**

In the first series of experiment, we evaluated the performance of RLF (without considering bias) and compared our results with two state-of-the-art models. The first model is the

<!-- PAGE 6 -->

M. Pazsant, A.A. Bajdidi, S. Kothmann et al. 
*Applied Soft Computing*
 142 (2022) 103146

**Table 3**

A comparison of the result of the image search by RLF-trained EfficientNet, KimiaNet, and DenseNet that are evaluated on the Lung and Brain tumor types. The results are reported in terms of the F1-score. In addition, the number of training and test samples are given.

| Dataset | #Training | #Test | Sub-type | DenseNet | KimiaNet | RLF |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Lung | 23221 | 11535 | LUSC | 0.65 | 0.78 | 0.84 |
|  |  |  | LUSC | 0.69 | 0.84 | 0.86 |
| Brain | 34629 | 8068 | GBM | 0.71 | 0.81 | 0.82 |

**Fig. 4.**
 A bar-chart based comparison of the results of the search through representations generated by the DenseNet, KimiaNet, and RLF-trained EffcientNet on 4 tumor subtypes. The results show that FOR all classes the RLF training performs better than KimiaNet and DenseNet.

original DenseNet [21–160] trained with 1.2 million natural images from ImageNet [19]. The pre-trained DenseNet is utilized to extract feature vectors for the histopathology images. The second model is a state-of-the-art network in digital pathology, called KimiaNet, that is based on the DenseNet-121 architecture but has been trained with a large number of histopathology patches [20]. Fig. 4 represents the comparison of image search results on two datasets, obtained using EffcientNet with RLF, KimiaNet, and DenseNet. In addition, Table 3 provides the F1-score values obtained from three models. As seen, the proposed model achieved better results for all subtypes of the Lung and Brain cancers. The results for the lung dataset indicate that our proposed model can improve the accuracy by 6% and 2% compared to KimiaNet and 19% and 17% compared to DenseNet for two classes, LUSC and LUAD, respectively. In another experiment on the Brain dataset, our model performs well on both classes, and the results have significantly enhanced by 1% and up to 91% for GCM and from 77% and 81% to 92% for GBM compared with DenseNet and KimiaNet, respectively. Thus, the proposed RLF for training the EffcientNet can result in more accurate search image models compared to more complicated DNNs which are trained with the purpose of classification. In other words, it shows utilizing search-based loss functions may perform better than classification-based loss functions for image search.

In addition to F1-score, in order to show the details of models, the precision and accuracy are calculated for both datasets. The results for the lung dataset in the Table 4 indicate that our proposed model can improve the accuracy by 18% and 5% compared with DenseNet and KimiaNet, respectively. In another experiment on the Brain dataset, our model performs well, and the results have significantly enhanced from 81% to 92%. In addition, as can be seen in Table 4, the precision is improved near 3% and 14% for the Brain and Lung datasets, respectively. Fig. 5 illustrates the confusion matrices of RLF and KimiaNet that show the performance of the models for both Lung and Brain datasets.

In addition to higher accuracy, the image size used for training our model (i.e., 224 × 224) is almost 20 times smaller than that of KimiaNet (i.e., 1000 × 1000). The reduced size of inputs makes our model very fast. The proposed model requires just around 20 minutes for each epoch, whereas the state-of-the-art, KimiaNet, model took approximately 110 minutes for the training phase on

**Fig. 5.**
 Confusion matrices of RLF and KimiaNet for the Lung and Brain datasets.

the same platform. Moreover, since the number of parameters was reduced from 7.1 to 4.3 millions, nearly 40% reduction, fewer computational resources are needed to train our network. The proposed model demands 8 GB memory of one GPU while the KimiaNet model used 4 GPUs with 128 GB memory for training. Also, the proposed model is trained for discrimination of cancer subtypes of a specific organ and is correspondingly capable of training with a smaller dataset, while the KimiaNet is trained on the WSIs from 32 cancer types. Table 4 compares the number of parameters, epoch, batch size, and the size of inputs for the DenseNet, KimiaNet, and the RLF-trained EffcientNet. The time of training for each epoch for DenseNet is not defined because it is not trained. As it can be seen, the number of parameters reduced by 2.8 millions and the size of patches is almost 20 times smaller than the state-of-the-art models.

### 5.2. External validation of ISL

In the second series of experiments, in order to show the effect of bias reduction on the results, we evaluated the performance of RLF and Instance Squeezing Learning (ISL) using the external validation. We compared the results from the previous experiment model (i.e., specialized EffcientNet model trained with classification-based loss function) with the proposed loss functions and investigated the effect of reducing bias on the results through squeezing. For the purpose of external validation, it was required to separate a portion of data belonging to a specific hospital to avoid using them in training and test sets.

**Training Phase.**
 In order to provide the data for external validation, we trained as many models as the number of hospitals. Each time, we separated the WSIs of one of the hospitals and trained the model with images of the remaining hospitals. The

<!-- PAGE 7 -->

Table 4

<!-- PAGE 8 -->

M. Pazhman, A.A. Bidgoli, S. Rahimian et al. 
*Applied Soft Computing*
 142 (2023) 103146

### Table 5

Comparison of F1-score value for subtypes of Lung cancer that obtained from different models for 17 hospitals as external dataset. The mentioned hospital in each row is excluded from training dataset to utilize its images as an external validation (n = #IDU).

| Hospital | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL |
| Institute, Gynecology Consortium | (8, 8) | (0.67, 0.63) | (0.59, 0.53) | (0.73, 0.71) | (0.73, 0.71) | (0.73, 0.71) |
| Indivinum | (5, 5) | (0.91, 0.89) | (0.83, 0.75) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) |
| Christine Healthcare | (6, 6) | (0.81, 0.73) | (0.80, 0.80) | (0.80, 0.80) | (0.80, 0.80) | (0.80, 0.80) |
| Atrium | (1, 8) | (0.50, 0.86) | (0, 0.74) | (1, 1) | (1, 1) | (1, 1) |
| Mayo Clinic Rochester | (0, 8) | (0, 0.89) | (0, 0.89) | (0, 0.75) | (0, 0.75) | (0, 0.75) |
| Washington University-Albama | (1, 2) | (1, 1) | (0, 0.89) | (1, 1) | (1, 1) | (1, 1) |
| Bonner Park | (2, 0) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) |
| Ontario Inst. for Cancer Research | (1, 2) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) |
| University of North Carolina | (2, 0) | (0, 0.89) | (0, 0.89) | (0, 0.75) | (0, 0.75) | (0, 0.75) |
| Prince Charles Hospital | (1, 1) | (1, 1) | (1, 1) | (1, 1) | (1, 1) | (1, 1) |
| University of Pittsburgh | (2, 0) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) |
| Washington University-St. Louis | (2, 2) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) |
| Metropolitan Oncology Center | (2, 0) | (0, 0.67) | (0, 0.67) | (0, 0.67) | (0, 0.67) | (0, 0.67) |
| Washington Univ.-Evansville Clinic | (2, 0) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) |
| Theraklinik at Uni Heidelberg | (2, 0) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) |
| Ludwig | (1, 1) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) |
| Hospital with one WSI | (2, 4) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) | (0.67, 0.67) |
| Overall | (38, 43) | 67.90% | 67.90% | 72.80% | 72.80% | 72.80% |

### Table 6

Comparison of F1-scores for subtypes of Brain cancer that obtained from different models for 12 hospitals as external validations (n = #IDU, n = #IDU, n = #IDU).

| Hospital | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL |
| University of Sao Paulo | (0, 2) | (0, 1) | (0, 1) | (0, 1) | (0, 1) | (0, 1) |
| Henry Ford Hospital | (6, 9) | (0.67, 0.63) | (0.62, 0.67) | (0.50, 0.67) | (0.50, 0.67) | (0.50, 0.67) |
| Care Western-St. John | (0, 8) | (0, 0.80) | (0, 0.80) | (0, 0.80) | (0, 0.80) | (0, 0.80) |
| Dept of Neurosurgery at U of I | (0, 6) | (0, 0.67) | (0, 0.67) | (0, 0.67) | (0, 0.67) | (0, 0.67) |
| MD Anderson | (6, 3) | (0.75, 0.67) | (0.75, 0.67) | (0.75, 0.67) | (0.75, 0.67) | (0.75, 0.67) |
| Mayo Clinic | (0, 2) | (0, 0.50) | (0, 0.50) | (0, 0.50) | (0, 0.50) | (0, 0.50) |
| MD Anderson | (7, 0) | (0.69, 0.50) | (1, 0.50) | (0.73, 0.50) | (0.73, 0.50) | (0.73, 0.50) |
| MSK | (6, 3) | (0.69, 0.50) | (0.69, 0.50) | (0.69, 0.50) | (0.69, 0.50) | (0.69, 0.50) |
| Care Western | (8, 3) | (0.80, 0.57) | (0.80, 0.57) | (0.80, 0.57) | (0.80, 0.57) | (0.80, 0.57) |
| MRACC | (0, 2) | (0, 0.50) | (0, 0.50) | (0, 0.50) | (0, 0.50) | (0, 0.50) |
| Hospital with one WSI | (3, 5) | (0, 1) | (0, 1) | (0, 1) | (0, 1) | (0, 1) |
| Overall | (34, 40) | 71.60% | 71.60% | 79.70% | 79.70% | 79.70% |

### Table 7

A comparison of the F1-scores for hospital classification. The feature extracted by the function has the lowest hospital classification accuracy that shows the bias has been reduced (ISL = EffiScore).

| Dataset | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL | ISL |
| Lung Cancer | 73.2% | 45.9% | 41.6% | 41.6% | 41.6% | 41.6% |
| Brain Cancer | 68.0% | 53.7% | 53.7% | 53.7% | 53.7% | 53.7% |

Table 7 shows the accuracy of hospital classification for different models on two cancer types. As it is reported, the extracted feature vectors from the classification model suffer from hospital bias, since it learned to distinguish source site institutions. The RTL model reflects the accuracy of hospital classification dramatically and ISL model reduced it further. The dropping accuracy to 30% (from 73% to 41%) for the Lung dataset and to 25% (from 68% to 43%) for the Brain dataset in the ISL model shows that the ranking loss function reduces bias in the trained model to learn the source site institution, instead of the ranking loss function to institution during the training, the sequencing with ranking loss model concentrates on salient hospital-agnostic image features.

### 6. Concluding remarks

Recent progress in deep neural networks in pathology has led to the accelerated adoption of digital pathology. This development creates opportunities to devise novel solutions for various problems in anatomic pathology. However, due to challenges such as the large WSI sizes and implicit bias in image datasets, designing and implementing a computer-aided diagnosis system faces some serious obstacles. To address these challenges and train a DNN-based customized for the image search and reduce the bias effect on the results, we proposed a novel ranking loss function (RTL). The new loss function enables us to train a network based on image search. In addition, we proposed instance sequencing learning (ISL) to alleviate the bias during the training using isolating the given hospital-specific patterns. The proposed models were compared with two state-of-the-art DNNs. The results indicate that the trained model is more accurate in image search of Lung and Brain tumor types. Furthermore, external validation was conducted by the alternate exclusion of hospitals during the training phase to assess the proposed loss function in reducing bias. A comparison of results obtained using the classification and ISL clearly shows that the accuracy of image search is increased on images from the hospitals that have not contributed to the training, and the bias is significantly reduced.

### Credit authorship contribution statement

Pooria Mazhaher, Methodology, Software, Writing - Analysis. Amir Aslani Bidgoli, Data curation, Writing - original draft. Analysis. Shahryar Rahimian, Conceptualization, Supervision, Methodology, A.R. Tafreshi, Conceptualization, Supervision, Methodology, Analysis, Writing.

### Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing

<!-- PAGE 9 -->

interests: Hamid R. Tizhooz reports a relationship with Parapulse Diagnostics (Consulting, equity or stock ownership).

Applied Sci. 2022, 12, 10146 | 10 of 10

## Data availability

Data is already public (TCGA project).

## Acknowledgments

This research was supported in part by a grant from Ontario Research Funds - Research Excellence. As well, the work was supported by grant for research in China, United States for (H.R.Tizhooz) and NSERC Discovery Grants (for S.Rahmanian and H.R.Tizhooz).

## References

1. H.R. Tizhooz, L. Pantanowitz, Artificial intelligence and digital pathology: challenges and opportunities.*J. Pathol. Inform.*2018, 9, 16.
2. T. Thokkathilakshmi, S. Kananamaya, A. Rasanathan, A.A. Bridget, S. Kala, M. Chakraborty, M.S.S. Kala, S. Sridhar, P. Mohandas, et al., Deep learning visualization, and interpretation of deep features in lung adenocarcinoma histology.*PLoS One*2018, 13, e0194880.
3. H. R. Tizhooz, K. Kala, H.R. Tizhooz, Representation learning of histology images using graph neural networks. In:*Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshop*, 2020, pp. 1088–1094.
4. H. R. Tizhooz, A. Kanan, N. Kanan, Deep learning for histology image content deep convolutional features.*Neurocomputing*249 (2017) 95–105.
5. H. R. Tizhooz, S.C.A. Hsu, H. R. Tizhooz, Deep learning for histology content-based image retrieval: A comprehensive study. In:*Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia*, 2016, pp. 157–166.
6. S. Kala, Content-Based Image Retrieval of Categorized Histopathology Scans: A Comparative Study of Convolution Neural Network, Local Binary Pattern and Bag of Visual Words (Master's thesis). University of Waterloo, 2018.
7. H. R. Tizhooz, M. Bahari, A. Rasanathan, S. Hemati, P. Ashraf, K. Gonzalez, H.R. Tizhooz, Multi-magnification image search in digital pathology.*BEEJ*2018, 10, 1–10.
8. N. Noori, O. Hu, F.M. Azelin, F.D. Faraci, A. Tavova, Addressing bias in big data and in the health care: A call for open science.*Pancreas*47 (2018) 1003–1004.
9. A. Leslie, N.T. Bindoff, T.J. Brinker, T. Luedde, A.T. Pearson, J.N. Karrer, Deep learning in cancer pathology: a new generation of clinical decision support.*J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol.*142 (2016) 34–43.
10. T. Nomatsu, N. Paritica, K. Caputo, T. Toyotake, A deeper look at dataset bias in deep learning applications in Computer Vision Applications.*Springer*2017, pp. 75–90.
11. J. Shlens, J. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T. T

<!-- PAGE 10 -->

P. Mazaheri, A.A. Bigdeli, S. Rahimyayani et al.

Applied Soft Computing 142 (2023) 110346

[33] H.D. Kabir, M. Abdar, A. Khorrami, S.M.J. Jalali, A.F. Atiya, S. Nahavandi, D. Srinivasan, Spinnet: Deep neural network with gradual input, IEEE Trans. Anil. Intell. (2022).

[34] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.

[35] S. Zagoruyko, N. Komodakis, Wide residual networks, 2016, arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07146.

[36] R. Ioffe, S. Lish, J. Qian, S. Chen, F.-Y. Liu, Neural architecture optimization, 2018, arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07233.

[37] M. Tan, Q. Le, Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2019, pp. 6105–6114.

[38] Y. He, J. Liu, Z. Liu, H. Wang, L.-J. Li, S. Han, Amc: Automl for model compression and acceleration on mobile devices, in: Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision, ECCV, 2018, pp. 784–800.

[39] E.K. Gupta, J. Kushan, Improved classification of cancerous histopathology images using color channel separation and deep learning, J. Multimed. Inf. Syst. 8 (3) (2021) 175–182.

[40] Y. Sun, F.A.R. Hamrah, R. Mochizuki, Optimized light-weight convolutional neural networks for histopathology cancer detection, in: 2020 IEEE 2nd Global Conference on Life Sciences and Technologies, LifeTech, IEEE, 2020, pp. 11–14.

[41] J. Wang, B. Liu, H. Xie, Z. Yang, H. Zhou, Boosted efficienNet: detection of lymph node metastasis in breast cancer using convolutional neural networks, Cancers 13 (4) (2021) 661.

[42] P. Mazaheri, A. Asilian, S. Rahimyayani, T. Dehkharghani, H. Telihsob, Customized efficienNet for histopathology image representation, 2022.

[43] S. Ioffe, C. Szegedy, Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2015, pp. 448–456.

[44] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, R. Salakhutdinov, Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 15 (1) (2014) 1929–1958.

[45] P. Barachandran, S. Zoppi, Q.V. Le, Swish: a self-gated activation function, 7 (1), 2017, p. 8, arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05941.

[46] Y. Niu, G.L. Olivier, Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines, in: Icml, 2010.

[47] S. Graham, M. Shaban, T. Quister, N.A. Eroshkina, S.A. Khurram, N. Rajpoot, Classification of lung cancer histology images using patch-level summary statistics, in: Medical Imaging 2018: Digital Pathology, Vol. 10581, International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2018, 1058119.

[48] S.K. Dubey, A decade survey of content based image retrieval using deep learning, IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol. (2021).

[49] C. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, K.G. Weeberger, Densely connected convolutional networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp. 4700–4708.

[50] A. Asilian, S. Rahimyayani, T. Dehkharghani, A. Rasekhti, H. Telihsob, Evolutionary computation in action: Hyperdimensional deep embedding spaces of gigapixel pathology images, 2022.