<!-- Page 1 -->

Medical Image Analysis 76 (2022) 102298

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Medical Image Analysis

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/media

# Federated learning for computational pathology on gigapixel whole slide images

Ming Y. Lua,1, Richard J. Chena,b,c,1, Dehan Konga, Jana Lipkovaa, Rajendra Singhc,Drew F.K. Williamsona,c, Tiffany Y. Chenb,c, Faisal Mahmooda,c,d,e

a Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States

b Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States

c Cancer Program, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States

d Data Science Department, Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center, Boston, MA, United States

e Department of Pathology, Northwell Health, NY, United States

f Harvard Data Science Initiative, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States

## ARTICLE INFO

### Article history:

Received 18 September 2020

Revised 7 October 2021

Accepted 2 November 2021

Available online 25 November 2021

### Keywords:

Federated learning

Pathology

Computational pathology

Whole slide imaging

Split learning

## ABSTRACT

Deep Learning-based computational pathology algorithms have demonstrated profound ability to excel in a wide array of tasks but struggle from characterization of well known morphological phenotypes to predicting non-human-identifiable features from histology such as molecular alterations. However, the development of robust, adaptable and accurate deep learning-based models often rely on the collection and time-costly curation large high-quality annotated training data that should ideally come from diverse sources and patient populations to cater for the heterogeneity that exists in such datasets. Multi-centric and collaborative integration of medical data across multiple institutions can naturally help overcome this challenge and boost the model performance but is limited by privacy concerns among other difficulties that may arise in the complex data sharing process as models scale towards using hundreds of thousands of gigapixel whole slide images. In this paper, we introduce privacy-preserving federated learning for gigapixel whole slide images in computational pathology using weakly-supervised attention multiple instance learning and differential privacy. We evaluated our approach on two different diagnostic problems using thousands of histology whole slide images with only slide-level labels. Additionally, we present a weakly-supervised learning framework for survival prediction and patient stratification from whole slide images and demonstrate its effectiveness in a federated setting. Our results show that using federated learning, we can effectively develop accurate weakly-supervised deep learning models from distributed data silos without direct data sharing and its associated complexities, while also preserving differential privacy using randomized noise generation. We also make available an easy-to-use federated learning for computational pathology software package: http://github.com/mahmoodlab/HistoF.

© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

## 1. Introduction

The emerging field of computational pathology holds great potential in increasing objectivity and enhancing precision of histopathological examination of tissue. Machine learning – and deep learning in particular – have demonstrated unprecedented performance in various pathology tasks such as characterization

of a disease phenotype (Wang et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2019; Anand et al., 2020; Bulten et al., 2020; Mahmood et al., 2019), quantification of the tumor microenvironment (Ijaved et al., 2020; Graham et al., 2019; Schapiro et al., 2017), prediction of survival (Muhammad et al., 2019) and treatment response (Niazi et al., 2019; Mahmood et al., 2019), and integration of genomics with histology for improved patient stratification (Chen et al., 2020; Mobadersany et al., 2018; Lazer et al., 2017). Thanks to the ability of such algorithms to mine sub-visual features – even beyond the scope of known pathological markers – deep learning models have managed to tackle challenging tasks such as estimating primary resource for metastatic tumors of unknown origin, identifying

1 Corresponding author at: Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.

E-mail address: faisal Mahmood@bwh.harvard.edu (F. Mahmood).

1 These authors contributed equally to this work.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2021.102298

1361-8415/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

---

<!-- Page 2 -->

MY, Lu, RJ, Chen, D, Kong et al.

Medical Image Analysis 76 (2022) 102298

Fig. 1. Overview of the weakly-supervised multiple instance learning in a federated learning framework. At each client site, for each WSI, the tissue regions are first automatically segmented and image patches are extracted from the segmented foreground regions. Then all patches are fed into a low-dimension feature representation using a pretrained CNN as the encoder. Each client site trains a model with weakly-supervised learning on local data (requires only the slide-level or patient-level labels) and sends the model weights each epoch to a central server. Random noise can be added to the weight parameters before communicating with the central hub for differential privacy preservation. On the central server, the global model is updated by averaging the model weights retrieved from all client sites. After the federated averaging, the updated weights of the global model is then sent to each client model for synchronization prior to starting the next federated round.

ing novel features of prognostic relevance (Yamamoto et al., 2019; Pell et al., 2019; Bera et al., 2019), and predicting genetic mutations from histomorphologic images only, without the use of immunohistochemical staining (Coudray et al., 2018). Among various approaches, weakly supervised methods such as attention MIL (Lu et al., 2019, 2020a) appear well-suited to potential adoption in clinical practice. Xiao et al. recently presented a censoring-aware deep ordinal regression method for survival prediction in computational pathology. Xiao et al. (2020). These models learn from weak annotations in the form of image or patient-level labels which can include labels such as diagnosis or survival associated with the patient. Such information is readily available in clinical records and thus the data annotation does not introduce significant overhead over standard clinical workflow, in contrast to pixel-level annotations of regions of interest required by supervised models.

As in all machine learning affairs, the model's accuracy and robustness can be significantly increased by incorporating diverse data reflecting variations in underlying patient populations, as well as data collection and preparation protocols. Specifically, in pathology, whole slide images (WSIs) used for computational analysis can exhibit immense heterogeneity. Such diversity arise from not only the different types of tissue preparation, but also the different fixation and variations in the tissue preparation, fixation and staining protocols, but also different scanner hardware that are used for digitization. While it may be possible and desirable to gain increased exposure to such heterogeneity through aggregation of medical data from multiple institutions into a centralized data repository in order to develop more generalizable models, data centralization poses challenges not only in the form of regulatory and le-

gal concerns (e.g. differing standards for data interoperability may preclude data transfer among institutions Schreiber et al. (2020)) but also technical difficulties such as high cost of transfer and storage of huge quantities of data. The latter is particularly relevant for computational pathology at scale since just 500 gp WSIs can be as large as the entirety of ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009).

Federated learning (Yang et al., 2019; Konecny et al., 2016; McMahan et al., 2017; Rieele et al., 2020) offers means to mitigate these challenges by enabling algorithms to learn from decentralized data distributed across various institutions. In this way, sensitive patient data are never transferred beyond the safety of institutional firewalls, and instead, the model training and validation occur locally at each institution and only the model specifics (e.g. parameters or gradients) are transferred. In general, federated learning can be achieved through two approaches. 1) Master-server: a master-server is used to transfer the model to each node (i.e. participating institution), where the model trains for several iterations using the local data. The master-server then collects the model parameters from each node, aggregates them in some manner, and updates the parameters of the global model. Updated parameters are then transferred back to the local nodes for the next round of training. 2) Local-server: the model transfers the locally-trained parameters to some or all of its peers and each node does its own parameter aggregation. The benefit of the master-server approach is that all governing mechanisms are separated from the local nodes which allows for easier protocol updates and inclusion of new institutions. In contrast, the peer-to-peer approach is less flexible – since all the protocols must be agreed-on in advance – however, the absence of a single controlling entity might be pre-

2

---

<!-- Page 3 -->

MY, LV, RJ, Chen, D., Kong et al.

Medical Image Analysis 76 (2022) 102298

ferred in some cases e.g. due to lower costs or greater decentralization.

Although the nodes never transfer data themselves – only the model specifics – if leaked or attacked these can be sufficient to indirectly expose sensitive patient information. Data anonymization alone does not provide sufficient protection (Rocher et al., 2019) since parts of the training data can be reconstructed by inversion of model parameters (Carlini et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020), gradients (Carlini et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020), or adversarial attacks (Wang et al., 2019; Hitaj et al., 2017). This is particularly worrisome in radiology where the medical scans can be used to reconstruct a patient's physical body image. Even though histology data do not hold such a direct link with patient identity, it might still allow an indirect patient identification e.g. in the case of rare diseases. The design of countermeasures for increasing differential privacy (DPI) is a major research topic (Carlini et al., 2019; Shalev-Shwartz, 2019; Kairouz et al., 2019). A popular strategy in the medical field is a contamination of the input data (Cheu et al., 2019) or the model parameters (Dong et al., 2019; Shalev-Shwartz, 2019) which increases the individually recognizable information while preserving the global distribution of the data (Kaisiss et al., 2020).

Though federated learning was originally proposed for non-clinical use (Smith et al., 2017; Shokri et al., 2015), it has already appeared in some medical applications. These include large-scale multicenter studies of genomics (Mandi et al., 2020; Rehman et al., 2019), radiology (Li et al., 2020b) or MRI scans of Brsimis et al., 2018; Choudhury et al., 2019a,b), or wearable health devices (Chen et al., 2020). In the field of medical imaging, federated learning is part of a popular in the neurosciences. So far it has been applied in tasks such as brain tumor (Li et al., 2019; Sheller et al., 2018) and brain tissue (Roy et al., 2019) segmentation, EEG signal classification (Ju et al., 2020), analysis of fMRI scans (Brisson et al., 2020), histopathology (Mandl et al., 2020) or MRI scans of neurodegenerative disease (Silva et al., 2019). Further adoption of federated learning in other medical domains is strongly anticipated due to the increasing demand for large and inter-institutional studies.

One of the fields that would strongly benefit from the federated framework is computational pathology (Andrieux et al., 2020b,a; Rieske et al., 2020). Since histopathologic diagnosis is the gold standard for many diseases, pathology data is largely available in almost any hospital. Federated learning would in principle enable deep learning models to learn from much larger and more diverse multi-institutional data sources without the challenges associated with data centralization and healthcare interoperability. Furthermore, while fully-supervised approaches are burdened by the need for manually pixel-wise annotations, federated learning can also realise, weakly-supervised approaches such as MIL simplify collaborative efforts by alleviating the requirement for such human expertise and the burden of creating pixel-level labels under unified annotation protocol in all participating institutions.

Herein, we present the key contributions of our work as follows:

1. 1. We present a large-scale computational pathology study to demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of privacy-preserving federated learning using thousands of gigapixel whole slide images.
2. 2. We account for the challenges associated with the lack of detailed annotations in most real world whole slide histopathology datasets and demonstrate how federated learning can be combined with weakly-supervised approaches to overcome and perform both binary and multi-class classification problems (demonstrated on breast cancer and renal cell cancer histological images) using only pixel-level labels.
3. 3. We extend the usage of attention-based pooling in multiple instance learning-based classification and present an in-

terpretable, weakly-supervised framework for survival prediction. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our patients' in computational pathology using whole slide images and patient-level prognostic information.

1. 4. We further validate the effectiveness of weakly-supervised deep survival models in a federated framework, paving the way for the development of prognostic models trained on multi-institutional cohorts with diverse populations.

We also make available an easy-to-use federated learning for computational pathology software package: http://github.com/mahmoodalavi/HistFed.

## 2. Methods

In this section, we will formulate our weakly-supervised federated multiple instance learning framework for performing privacy-preserving federated learning on data from across multiple institutions in the form of digitized gigapixel whole slide images.

### 2.1. Differential privacy and federated learning

In this problem, we want to develop deep learning models for performing predictive tasks on gigapixel WSI's by using data from different institutions. We denote data owned by institution i as D_i, which we assume for simplicity, is simply a data matrix with a finite number of rows and columns. The total B of all D_i and we denote their corresponding data silo as D_1, D_2, \dots, D_p. Since each medical institution will not share data with other parties due to various issues (e.g. institutional policies, incompatible data sharing protocols, technical difficulties associated with sharing large amount of data or fear of privacy loss), we cannot pool together their data and train a single deep learning model f_{\text{training}} for solving the desired task. Instead, a objective is to develop a federated learning framework where the data owners collaboratively train a model f_{\text{federated}} in which each data owner does not need to share their data. In this paper, we start from the assumption of the final model. In this paper, we adapt a master-server architecture, where each client node, representing each medical institution, locally utilizes the same deep learning architecture as one another and the global model, which we assume to be hosted on a central server hub. Each institution trains its respective model using local data and uploads the values of the trainable model parameters to the server hub. The server hub updates the frequency of every one epoch of local training). We also adopt a randomized mechanism previously utilized on multi-site fMRI analysis (Li et al., 2020a), which allows each data owner to blur the shared weight parameters of the global model \phi, to protect against overfitting to patient-specific information. After the master server receives all the parameters, it averages them in the global model and sends new parameters back to each local model for synchronization. Differential privacy is a popular definition of individual privacy (Dwork et al., 2014; Shokri & Shmatikov, 2015), which informally means that the attacker can learn virtually nothing about an individual's data from the global model or added to the dataset (Abadi et al., 2016). In this problem, it means when a data point d_i is removed from or added to the dataset D_i, the attacker can not determine the global model \phi from the output of weights of model f_{\text{federated}}. Differential privacy provides a bound s to represent the level of privacy preference that each institution can control. Formally, it says (Dwork et al., 2006), given a real-valued function f on a domain \mathcal{D}, a randomized oracle \mathcal{A} differing by exactly one example, i.e. |\mathcal{D} - \mathcal{D}| = 1, f satisfies (\epsilon, \delta)-differential privacy if for any subset of outputs S:

P(f(\mathbf{d}) \in S) \leq P(f(\mathbf{d}') \in S) + \delta \quad (1)

1

---

<!-- Page 4 -->

MY, LI, RJI, CHEN, D. KONG et al.

Medical Image Analysis 76 (2022) 102298

where the introduction of the \delta term relaxes the stricter notion of \epsilon-stability, which allows zero or even a very small differential probability being broken to occur with a small probability.

To satisfy (\epsilon, \delta)-differential privacy, first, we provide the definition of \delta, sensitivity of f denoted by \Delta(f) as the maximum difference in the outputs of f over all possible adjacent datasets D_1, D_2:

\Delta(f) = \max_{|D_1 - D_2| = 1} \|f(D_1) - f(D_2)\|_2 \quad (2)

For arbitrary \epsilon \in (0, 1), as stated by Theorem 3.2.2 (Dwork et al., 2014), adding random noise to f that is generated from a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and variance \sigma^2 of definition 1, i.e., N(0, \sigma^2), will result in \delta satisfying (\epsilon, \delta)-differential privacy, so \sigma^2 \leq \Delta(f)^2 and \epsilon^2 \geq 2 \ln \frac{1}{\delta}. After reweighting the two inequalities, in other words, for any choice of \epsilon, (\epsilon, \delta)-differential privacy can be achieved by adding Gaussian mechanism, where \delta is related to the variance of the Gaussian noise distribution via:

\begin{aligned} \sigma^2 &\geq \frac{\epsilon^2 \Delta(f)^2}{2} \Rightarrow \sigma^2 \geq 2 \ln \frac{1}{\delta} \frac{\Delta(f)^2}{\epsilon^2} \cdot \frac{\epsilon^2 \sigma^2}{2\Delta(f)^2} = \ln \left( \frac{1}{2\delta} \right) \frac{\epsilon^2 \sigma^2}{\Delta(f)^2} \\ &\Rightarrow \frac{1}{2\delta} < \exp \left( -\frac{\epsilon^2 \sigma^2}{2\Delta(f)^2} \right) < \delta \Rightarrow \exp \left( -\frac{\epsilon^2 \sigma^2}{2\Delta(f)^2} \right) \end{aligned} \quad (3)

In our federated learning setting, f involves a neural network consisting of many layers with trainable parameters making computing \Delta(f) intractable. However, without loss of generality, if we assume \Delta_2(f) = 1, where \Delta_2 is for a given level of \delta, increasing \sigma will make \delta smaller as well as \epsilon be smaller. Following, we let \sigma = a\eta, where \eta is the standard deviation of the weight parameters of each layer in the neural network, effectively linking a, a parameter adjustable for participating institutions, to the level of differential privacy protection.

## 2.2. Data preprocessing

We processed and analyzed all of our WSI data at 20x magnification. Due to the lack of labeled ROIs and the intractable computation expense of the whole image, we utilized a convolutional neural network (CNN) directly to the whole spatial extent of each WSI, we utilize a form of weakly-supervised machine learning known as multi-instance learning (MIL). Under the MIL framework, each WSI is treated as a collection (bag) of smaller regions (instances); enabling the model to learn directly from the bag-level label (diagnosis or survival information) during training. The details of the MIL and weakly-supervised learning algorithms we use are described in Sections 2.3 and 2.4. To construct the MIL bags, we utilize the CLAM (Lu et al., 2020a) process pipeline to automatically segment the WSI into regions of each WSI and divide them into M 256 × 256 image crops (instances), where M varies with the amount of tissue content in each slide. To overcome the computational challenges resulting from the enormous sizes of gigapixel WSIs bags, each 256 × 256 RGB instance further undergoes dimensionality-reduction via a pretrained ResNe50 CNN encoder (truncated after the 3rd residual block for spatial average pooling), and then decoded as a 256-dimensional feature vector for efficiency in training and inference. Accordingly, each WSI in the dataset is represented by a M \times 1024 matrix tensor.

For survival prediction, all WSIs corresponding to each patient case are analyzed and processed as a single bag. The patient is represented by individual bags of size M_1 \times M_2 respectively, the bags are concatenated along the first dimension to form a single patient bag of dimensions \sum_{i=1}^M M_1 \times 1024.

## 2.3. Weakly-supervised learning on W5E

We adopted a multiple instance learning-based framework for weakly-supervised classification and survival prediction and use it

as the basis for performing federated learning on gigapixel WSIs. We first describe the weakly-supervised learning framework in the case of a single local model (no federated learning). Each model consists of a projection module f_{proj}, an attention module f_{att}, and a prediction layer f_{pred}. The projection module consists of sequential, trainable fully-connected layers that project the fixed feature embeddings obtained using a pretrained feature encoder into a more compact, feature space specific to histopathology images, the chosen feature model. Given the jth instance in WS_i/patient bag of M_j patch embeddings in the form of a X_i \in \mathbb{R}^{M_j \times 1024} matrix tensor, for simplicity, we use a single linear layer W_{proj} to project X_i to project incoming patch-level embeddings into a 512-dimensional latent space, denoted by H_i \in \mathbb{R}^{M_j \times 512}. The f_{proj} module uses attention-based pooling (Lise et al., 2018) to identify information rich patches/locations from the slides and aggregates their information into a single global representation as the whole patch embedding H_{att} \in \mathbb{R}^{512}. We use the gated variant of the attention network architecture introduced by Lise et al. (2018). Accordingly, f_{att} consists of 3 fully-connected layers with weights U_1, V_2 and W_3, and learns to assign an attention score on the whole patch embedding H_{att} (Each row entry in H_{att} indicating its contribution to the bag-level feature representation) h_{bag} \in \mathbb{R}^{512}, where q_{att} represents the score for the mth patch and is given by:

q_{att,m} = \sum_{j=1}^M \exp \left\{ \frac{\text{Exp}[W_3(H_{att,j}) \otimes \text{Sig}(U_1 H_{att,j})]}{M} \right\} \exp \left\{ \frac{\text{Exp}[W_3(\text{tanh}(V_2 H_{att,j})) \otimes \text{Sig}(U_2 H_{att,j})]}{M} \right\} \quad (4)

Alternatively, the attention score vector for the whole bag is denoted by: H_{bag} \in \mathbb{R}^{512}. The attention score on bag-level prediction h_{bag} is calculated by using the predicted attention scores as weights for averaging all the feature embeddings in the bag as:

h_{bag} = \text{Attn-pool}(A_i, H_i) = \sum_{j=1}^{M_j} q_{att,j} h_{att,j} \quad (5)

We used a 256-dimensional representation for the hidden layers in the attention network and apply Dropout with p = 0.25 to these activations for regularization. Similarly, U_1, V_2, W_3 \in \mathbb{R}^{512 \times 512}. The f_{pred} module takes the prediction layer f_{pred} maps the bag representation h_{bag} to probabilities \mathbf{s}_y using a different activation function and loss function for classification and survival prediction: \mathbf{s}_y = f_{pred}(h_{bag}). The methodological details are described in Section 3.

Weakly-supervised classification For weakly-supervised classification, we use the prediction layer f_{pred} to predict the unnormalized class-probability logits \mathbf{s}_y, which are then super-vised using the slide-level label \mathbf{y} by applying the softmax activation and computing the standard cross-entropy loss.

Weakly-supervised survival prediction For weakly-supervised survival prediction, we use right-censored data. We first sort the discrete time intervals based on quantiles of event times for uncensored patients. More formally, we first consider the continuous time intervals T_{int} of the patients in the dataset in the order indexed by j, consists of a follow-up time T_{int,0} [0, \infty) and a binary censorship status c_j where c_j = 1 indicates censorship (the event did not occur by the end of the follow-up period) while c_j = 0 indicates the event occurred. We then sort the T_{int,0} and T_{int,0} with the partition the continuous time scale T_{int} into R non-overlapping bins: \{0, t_1\}, [t_1, t_2), \dots, [t_{R-1}, \infty) and discretize T_{int} accordingly where:

T_{int,0} = \mathbb{P} \{T_{int} \in [t_r, t_{r+1})\} \quad (6)

In our study, we investigated R \in \{2, 4, 6, 8\} (results presented in Section 3.5), where for each choice of R (number of bins), t_1,

4

---

<!-- Page 5 -->

MY, Lu, RJ, Chen, D, Kong et al.

Medical Image Analysis 76 (2022) 102298

t_{2,i}, \dots, t_{k,i} are determined based on quantiles of event times of unconfirmed patients. The notation \hat{t}_{i,j} from now on will be used to denote the discrete survival time T_{i,j|k} simply as T_j and to be consistent with the notation we used for classification, we refer to the ground truth label Y_j. Given a patient's bag-level feature representation \mathbf{h}_{bag} as calculated by the model, the prediction layer f_{pred} is responsible for modeling the likelihood function defined as:

f_{\text{hazard}}(r | \mathbf{h}_{bag}) = P(T_j = r | T_j \geq r, \mathbf{h}_{bag}) \quad (7)

which relates to the survival function through:

f_{\text{surv}}(r | \mathbf{h}_{bag}) = P(T_j > r | \mathbf{h}_{bag}) = \int_{r=0}^{\infty} (1 - f_{\text{hazard}}(u | \mathbf{h}_{bag})) du \quad (8)

Since we support the label set T_i \in \{0, \dots, R-1\} to be the support of the hazard function, and R corresponding to number of bins of event times, f_{pred} is a linear layer with weight parameters \mathbf{W}_{pred} \in \mathbb{R}^{R \times 512}. Finally, given logits \mathbf{s}_j = f_{pred}(\mathbf{h}_{bag}), the sigmoid activation is applied to predict hazard distribution since it represents the probability of an event, which are confined to positive real-values in the range of [0, 1]. For model optimization, we maximize the log likelihood function corresponding to a discrete survival model (Tut et al., 2016), which is written as:

l = (1 - c_j) \cdot \log(P(T_j = Y_j | \mathbf{h}_{bag})) + c_j \cdot \log(f_{\text{surv}}(Y_j | \mathbf{h}_{bag})) \quad (9)

By rewriting P(T_j = Y_j | \mathbf{h}_{bag}) = f_{\text{hazard}}(r | \mathbf{h}_{bag}) f_{\text{surv}}(Y_j | \mathbf{h}_{bag}), the loss we minimize based on the log likelihood function (Zadeh and Schmid, 2020) can be expressed as:

L = -l - c_j \cdot \log(f_{\text{surv}}(Y_j | \mathbf{h}_{bag})) \\ - (1 - c_j) \cdot \log(f_{\text{surv}}(Y_j - 1 | \mathbf{h}_{bag})) \\ - (1 - c_j) \cdot \log(f_{\text{hazard}}(Y_j | \mathbf{h}_{bag})) \quad (10)

During training, we additionally upweight the contribution of unconfirmed patient predictions by assigning a weighted sum of 1 and l_{\text{uncensored}}, which is defined by the terms:

l_{\text{uncensored}} = - (1 - c_j) \cdot \log(f_{\text{surv}}(Y_j - 1 | \mathbf{h}_{bag})) \\ - (1 - c_j) \cdot \log(f_{\text{hazard}}(Y_j | \mathbf{h}_{bag})) \quad (11)

Accordingly, the loss we optimize for weakly-supervised survival prediction is:

L_{\text{surv}} = (1 - \beta) \cdot L + \beta \cdot l_{\text{uncensored}} \quad (12)

#### 2.4. Weakly-supervised federated learning with differential privacy

For both classification and survival prediction, we train the models on each client server within a federated learning setup, where each model is trained locally and the weights of the model are collected each epoch and aggregated to update the global model. The central model then sends back the new weights to each client model (Fig. 1). To preserve the differential privacy of the individual data and protecting each client's privacy, we introduce a randomized mechanism, i.e., the Gaussian mechanism which we introduced in Section 2.1. Hereby, our algorithm for collaboratively training server model and client models is shown in Algorithm 1.

In the proceeding section, we demonstrate the feasibility, adaptability and interpretability of attention-based multiple instance federated learning on three different computational pathology datasets: (A) breast cancer carcinoma (BRCA) subtyping (B). Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC) subtyping (C) Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma (CCRC) survival prediction.

#### Algorithm 1

Privacy-preserving federated learning using attention-based multiple instance learning for multi-site histology-classification and survival prediction.

Input:

- I. WS1 Data and weak annotation (e.g. patient diagnosis or prognosis) scattered amongKparticipating institutional sites:(X1, Y1) = {(X1,1, Y1,1), ..., (X1,N1, Y1,N1)}, where(X_{1,i}, Y_{1,i})representsi-th WS1 and corresponding label for training stored at siteiinNpairs of classification,X_{1,i}is set of all diagnostic WSIs for patientiwhereas in classification, it is a single WS1.(X2, Y2) = {(X2,1, Y2,1), ..., (X2,N2, Y2,N2)} to denote WS1 data-label pair after pre-processing (patching and feature extraction) via a pretrained CNN feature encoder.
- (X1, Y1) = {(X1,1, Y1,1), ..., (X1,N1, Y1,N1)}, where(X_{1,i}, Y_{1,i})representsi-th WS1 and corresponding label for training stored at siteiinNpairs of classification,X_{1,i}is set of all diagnostic WSIs for patientiwhereas in classification, it is a single WS1.
- (X2, Y2) = {(X2,1, Y2,1), ..., (X2,N2, Y2,N2)} to denote WS1 data-label pair after pre-processing (patching and feature extraction) via a pretrained CNN feature encoder.
- II. Neural network models on local clients:f_{\text{class}} = f_{\text{cls}}_1, \dots, f_{\text{cls}}_Kand global modelf_{\text{hazard}}stored on the central server. Each modelf_jconsists of a projection modulef_{\text{proj}}, an attention modulef_{\text{attn}}and prediction layerf_{\text{pred}}.f_{\text{proj}}projects the images of the local models as\mathbf{W}_{\text{cls}},f_{\text{attn}}projects the global model as\mathbf{W}_{\text{hazard}}.
- III. Noise generatorM(\cdot), which generates Gaussian random noise\epsilon \sim (0, \sigma^2 \mathbf{I}^n), where\epsilondenotes the noise level for eachnis the standard deviation of a normal network weight matrix.
- IV. Random number generatorR(\cdot)for sampling.
- V. Optimizers\text{opt}(\cdot, \dots, \text{opt}(\cdot)), that update the model weights w.r.t a suitable loss metricLusing gradient descent.
- VI. Weight coefficient for each client during federated averaging, e.g.Y_i = \frac{X_i}{\sum X_i}.

- 1. Initialize all model weights\{\mathbf{W}_{\text{hazard}}^0, \mathbf{W}_{\text{cls}}^1, \dots, \mathbf{W}_{\text{cls}}^K\}
- 2. fori = 1toKdo
- 3.   forj = 1toNdo
- 4.\mathbf{H}_i = f_{\text{proj}}^i(X_{i,j})
- 5.\mathbf{A}_{i,j} = f_{\text{attn}}^i(\mathbf{H}_i)
- 6.\mathbf{B}_{i,j} = f_{\text{attn}}^i(\text{pool}(\mathbf{A}_{i,j}, Y_{i,j}))
- 7.\mathbf{W}_{\text{cls}}^i = \text{opt}(\mathbf{A}_{i,j}, Y_{i,j}, M(\mathbf{W}_{\text{cls}}^i))
- 8.   end for
- 9.\mathbf{W}_{\text{hazard}}^i = \text{opt}(\mathbf{B}_{i,j}, Y_{i,j}, M(\mathbf{W}_{\text{hazard}}^i))
- 10.   fori = 1toKdo
- 11.\mathbf{W}_{\text{cls}}^i = \text{opt}(\mathbf{W}_{\text{cls}}^i)
- 12.   end for
- 13. end for
- 14. return global modelf_{\text{hazard}}

## 3. Experiments and results

### 3.1. Dataset description

Weakly-supervised classification. To evaluate the proposed federated learning framework, we first investigated classification in histopathology, we examined two clinical diagnostic tasks for two separate disease models, namely, Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC) and Breast Invasive Carcinoma (BRCA). For both tasks, we used publicly available WSIs from the TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) in addition to in-house data collected at the Brigham and Women's Hospital for model development and evaluation. In all cases, each patient's breast cancer WSIs were obtained from ground truth slide-level diagnosis and no pixel or ROI-level annotation available.

Breast cancer dataset. For the first binary task of classifying primary breast Invasive Carcinoma as either lobular or ductal morphological subtypes, 1056 FFPE diagnostic WSIs (211 lobular and 845 ductal) were retrieved from the TCGA BRCA (Breast Invasive Carcinoma) study and our in-house dataset consists of 1070 WSIs of primary breast cancer (958 lobular and 912 ductal). Accordingly, in total we used 2126 Breast WSIs (369 lobular and 1757 ductal).

Renal cell cancer dataset. In the second task of multi-class classification, we used publicly available WSIs from the CCRC, papillary cell (PRCC) and chromophobe cell (CHRCRC) morphological subtypes, we collected 937 WSIs (519 CCRC, 297 PRCC and 121

5

---

<!-- Page 6 -->

MY, Lu, RJ, Chen, D, Kong et al.

Medical Image Analysis 76 (2022) 102298

CHRC, from the corresponding studies in TCGA and our in-house dataset consisting of 247 WSIs of primary Rectal colon carcinoma [184, CCRC, 40 PRCC and 23 CHCRC]. In total we used 1184 kidney WSIs (703 CCRC, 337 PRCC and 144 CHCRC).

Weakly-supervised survival prediction. We also examined federated learning for weakly-supervised survival prediction based on histopathology. Specifically, for patients diagnosed with renal clear cell carcinoma, we used right-censored, overall survival data from the TCGA-KIRC available via the Cancer Research UK. 511 patient cases were retrieved from TCGA-KIRC. All diagnostic WSIs corresponding to each patient case were used for analysis.

### 3.2. Experiments on multi-institutional WSI data

In each of the two weakly-supervised classification tasks, we considered four distinct “institutional” sites. These sites were identified by first naturally considering all in-house BWH data as one distinct institutional site. Then, for each TCGA cohort, we identified the true source of the BWH data and the purpose of simulating federated learning across multiple institutions. We then randomly partitioned the set of unique tissue source sites into 3 non-overlapping, roughly equal-sized subsets, and grouped together the data corresponding to each subset of tissue source sites to serve as 3 distinct institutional sites. Similarly, for CCRC survival prediction, we used 3 institutional sites created by randomly partitioning the tissue source sites that contributed to the TCGA-KIRC cohort. The details of these partitions are summarized below for each task (Tables 1–3).

Once the institutional sites were identified, the dataset is then randomly partitioned into a training, validation and test set, respectively consisting of 70, 15 and 15% of patient cases from each site, repeated using 5 different random seeds. For classification, given the class imbalance nature of the datasets, within each institutional site, stratified sampling is used to ensure sufficient representation of minority classes across the training, validation and test set. Additionally, if a single patient case contains multiple diagnostic slides, all of them were drawn together into the same set when

that patient is sampled. Similarly, for survival prediction, sampling is stratified based on both the discretized follow-up time (binned based on quartiles of event times of uncensored patients) and the censorship status.

For each task, we used the model architecture and loss function as described in detail in Section 2.3. To train each local model, we used the Adam optimizer with default hyperparameters, a learning rate of 2e-4 and l_2 weight decay of 1e-5 for all experiments. For survival prediction, we chose to use a much larger number of uncensored patients should be upweighted, was set to 0.15. Additionally, we monitored the validation performance each epoch and performed early stopping. The federated model never does not improve for 20 consecutive epochs (federated rounds), but only after it has been trained for at least 35 epochs. The model check-point with the best validation performance (lowest loss for classification and best AUC for survival prediction) was then used to evaluate on the held-out test set. For each task, we investigated 3 scenarios: (1) training on data from a single institution, (2) training on federated data from all institutions together (referred to as federated learning) and (3) training on data from all institutions using federated averaging, as described in Section 2.4 and outlined in details in Algorithm 1.

For scenario 3, while the originally proposed federated averaging algorithm (McMahon et al., 2017) weights the contribution of each local model by its respective number of training samples (\gamma_i = \frac{N_i}{N}) when updating the weights of the central model, Li et al. (2021a) propose to weight each local model equally \gamma_i = \frac{1}{M}. In our study, we stick to the design of the original algorithm but also investigate the performance between weighted averaging vs. simple averaging in Section 3.6, where results show minimal difference between results. We also studied changing the strength of Gaussian ran-dom noise added to local model weights during federated averaging, and its effect on the performance. For scenario 3, we used the loss function in Section 2.3. For each model f_i, we generated Gaus-sian noise z_i = (0, \sigma^2 \mathbf{1}^2) where \eta is the standard deviation of the weight parameters in the individual layer of the network and \alpha controls the noise level. In our experiments, we varied \alpha in \{0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1\}. In the next section, we present results demonstrating the effectiveness of weakly-supervised fed-erated learning for both binary and multi-class classification, as well as survival prediction.

### 3.3. Experimental results

We evaluated our proposed weakly-supervised, federated learning method on a multi-class classification and a binary classification problem (Figs. 2, 3, Tables 4 and 5) as well as survival prediction (Fig. 4 and Table 6) and demonstrated the feasibility of performing privacy-preserving, federated learning on WSI data in all tasks.

In both BRCA subtyping (Table 4) and RCC subtyping (Table 5), the model performance is evaluated using a wide variety of classification metrics. For each task, we use the ROC curve, area under the precision (mAP), classification error, F1 score, balanced accuracy (bAcc) and Cohen’s \kappa (macro-averaging) is used to extend binary classification metrics to multi-class classification in the case of RCC subtyping. We found that the model performance benefited significantly from training on multi-institutional data using federated learning, compared to learning from data within a single institution. In fact, we found the models trained using federated learning to be generally competitive in performance even when compared to scenario 2, where model is trained by first centralizing (sharing) all training data to a single institution. This is true even when different levels of random noise are applied for privacy preservation. For \alpha \in \{0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1\}, for BRCA subtyping, the mean test

Table 1

Partition for BRCA subtyping (number of WSIs).

|   | IIC | IDC | Total |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| TCGA Site 1 | 56 | 155 | 211 |
| TCGA Site 2 | 46 | 268 | 314 |
| TCGA Site 3 | 109 | 422 | 531 |
| BWH | 158 | 912 | 1070 |
| Total | 369 | 1757 | 2126 |

Table 2

Partition for RCC subtyping (number of WSIs).

|   | CCRC | PRCC | CHRC | Total |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| TCGA Site 1 | 108 | 120 | 39 | 267 |
| TCGA Site 2 | 78 | 100 | 23 | 201 |
| TCGA Site 3 | 333 | 77 | 51 | 461 |
| BWH | 184 | 40 | 23 | 247 |
| Total | 703 | 337 | 144 | 1184 |

Table 3

Partition for CCRC survival prediction (number of cases).

|   | Uncensored | Censored | Total |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| TCGA Site 1 | 16 | 88 | 104 |
| TCGA Site 2 | 27 | 71 | 98 |
| TCGA Site 3 | 128 | 203 | 331 |
| Total | 171 | 340 | 511 |

6

---

<!-- Page 7 -->

MY, LU, RI, CHEN, D. KONG et al.

Medical Image Analysis 76 (2022) 102928

Figure 2 consists of four panels (a, b, c, d) showing ROC curves and validation loss. Panels a and b show ROC curves for BRCA and RCC histologic subtyping, respectively. The x-axis is 1-Specificity and the y-axis is Sensitivity. Multiple curves are shown for different models: Controlnet (AUC=0.979 to 0.991), Convnet (AUC=0.979 to 0.991), and various combinations of models with different learning methods (e.g., s.d., s.d. + s.d., s.d. + s.d. + s.d.). Panels c and d show validation loss over Epochs (0 to 100) for the same models and learning methods. The y-axis is Validation loss. Panels c and d also include bar charts showing the AUC for each task (Gene, Site, Federated, Controlnet) for each model and learning method.

Fig. 2. Performance, comparative analysis and loss curves. a–c, d-f The classification performance and loss curves of BRCA histologic subtyping and RCC histologic subtyping, respectively. Top: ROC curves are generated on the test sets for models trained using a centralized database, federated learning (with different levels of Casian case noise added during federated time averaging) and using training data local to each institution individually. The AUC score (averaged over 5-fold cross-validation, s.d.) is reported for each experiment; macro-averaging is used for the multi-class classification of RCC subtyping. Using multinstitutional data and federated learning, we achieved a test set AUC between 0.833 and 0.862 for BRCA histologic subtyping and an AUC of between 0.979 and 0.979 for RCC histologic subtyping, respectively. Middle: Balanced accuracy score and the sensitivity (recall) for each task (IDC: Invasive Ductal Carcinoma, ILC: Invasive Lobular Carcinoma, BRCA: BRCA subtyping, CHIRCC: Chromophobe Renal Cell Carcinoma, CCRC: Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma, PRC: Papillary Renal Cell Carcinoma). Bottom: Validation loss curves for BRCA subtyping are plotted for all experiments to assess model performance when accounting for class-imbalance in the respective test set. Error bars show s.d. from 5-fold cross-validation. Bottom: For each experiment, the training loss and validation loss is monitored over each epoch before early stopping is triggered (see Section 3.2). Loss curves are shown for a single cross-validation fold from each task. Federated learning is observed to converge to a higher training and validation loss value in both tasks.

AUC ranged from 0.833 to 0.862 when using federated learning for different levels of random noise and for RCC subtyping, the macro-averaged test AUC ranged from 0.974 to 0.976. In addition to strong performance, in Fig. 3, we also demonstrated that models trained using privacy-preserving federated learning can saliently localize regions of high diagnostic relevance and identify morphological features characteristic of each underlying tumor subtype. However, consistent with previous studies (Lu et al., 2020b), we found that the model performance significantly deteriorated when \alpha was set too high (e.g., \alpha = 1), showing that there is indeed a trade off between model performance and privacy protection.

For survival prediction, we evaluated the model performance using the c-Index, which measures the concordance in ranking patients by their assigned risk score, around truth at a given time value, as well as the average cumulative/dynamic AUC (Huang and Chiang, 2010) for time dependent ROC curves, which quantifies the ability of a model to distinguish subjects who fail by a given time

with subjects who fail after this time, across many time points. Additionally, based on the predicted risk score for each patient in the test set, we performed hypothesis testing using the log-rank test to assess whether each model can stratify patients into distinct high risk and low risk groups (cutoff based on 50th percentile of the model's predicted risk scores) that resulted in statistically significantly different survival distributions (Table 6). When trained using data from a single institution, only 1 out of 3 institutions was able to yield a model that can stratify patients into distinct survival groups based on predicted risk scores. Notably, we observed that the model trained using data local to site 3 delivered performance comparable to that of centralized training and using federated learning. This can likely be attributed to site 3 having a much larger local dataset (n=381) compared to the other 2 sites (n=104 and n=76 respectively). Similar dataset-size imbalance among different participating institutions frequently occurs in the real-world, and is also reflected in the imbalanced distribution of patient cases

7

---

<!-- Page 8 -->

MY, Li, RX, Chen, D, Kong et al.

Medical Image Analysis 76 (2022) 102298

Fig. 3. Interpretability and visualization for weakly-supervised tumor classification. In order to interpret and validate the morphological features learned by the model for RCC and BRCA histologic subtype classification, for randomly selected WSIs in the respective test set, the model trained with privacy-preserving federated learning (\alpha = 0.01) is used to generate attention heatmaps using 256 \times 256 size tissue patches tiled at the 20\times magnification with a 90% spatial overlap. For each WSI, the attention scores predicted for all patches in the slide are normalized to the range of [0, 1] by converting them to percentiles. For subtype classification, patches with high attention refers to image regions of high diagnostic relevance used for class prediction. The normalized scores are then mapped to their respective spatial location in the slide. Finally, an RGB colormap is applied (red: high attention, blue: low attention), and the heatmap is overlaid on top of the original H&E image for display. For BRCA, patches of the most highly attended regions (red border) exhibited well-known tumor morphology of invasive ductal carcinoma (round cells with varying degrees of polymorphism arranged in tubules, nests, or papillae) and invasive lobular carcinoma (round and signal-ring cells with intracellular lumina and targetoid cytoplasmic mucin arranged in a single-file or trabecular pattern). For RCC, highly attended regions exhibited well-known tumor morphology of chromophobe RCC (large, round to polygonal cells with abundant, finely-recticulated to granular cytoplasm and perinuclear halos), clear cell RCC (large, round to polygonal cells with clear cytoplasm and distinct, but delicate cell borders), and papillary RCC (round to cuboidal cells with prominent papillary or tubulopapillary architecture with fibrovascular cores). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Table 4

BRCA subtyping test performance reported as five-fold mean (s.d.)

|   | AUC \uparrow | Error \downarrow | bAUC \uparrow | F1 \uparrow | mAP \uparrow | Cohen's \kappa \uparrow |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Site 1 only | 0.819 \pm 0.018 | 0.169 \pm 0.015 | 0.667 \pm 0.054 | 0.453 \pm 0.092 | 0.508 \pm 0.026 | 0.359 \pm 0.083 |
| Site 2 only | 0.752 \pm 0.096 | 0.178 \pm 0.018 | 0.684 \pm 0.053 | 0.478 \pm 0.074 | 0.454 \pm 0.075 | 0.373 \pm 0.079 |
| Site 3 only | 0.698 \pm 0.079 | 0.180 \pm 0.015 | 0.639 \pm 0.055 | 0.405 \pm 0.107 | 0.386 \pm 0.065 | 0.305 \pm 0.105 |
| Site 4 only | 0.788 \pm 0.017 | 0.190 \pm 0.029 | 0.691 \pm 0.009 | 0.490 \pm 0.013 | 0.441 \pm 0.050 | 0.485 \pm 0.031 |
| Centralized | 0.819 \pm 0.014 | 0.103 \pm 0.012 | 0.792 \pm 0.025 | 0.684 \pm 0.032 | 0.761 \pm 0.041 | 0.623 \pm 0.037 |
| Federated | 0.862 \pm 0.025 | 0.149 \pm 0.023 | 0.736 \pm 0.023 | 0.575 \pm 0.043 | 0.610 \pm 0.076 | 0.485 \pm 0.057 |
| Federated, \alpha = 0.001 | 0.836 \pm 0.024 | 0.161 \pm 0.023 | 0.744 \pm 0.016 | 0.598 \pm 0.032 | 0.537 \pm 0.049 | 0.467 \pm 0.045 |
| Federated, \alpha = 0.01 | 0.833 \pm 0.023 | 0.173 \pm 0.028 | 0.739 \pm 0.021 | 0.575 \pm 0.032 | 0.535 \pm 0.048 | 0.451 \pm 0.052 |
| Federated, \alpha = 0.1 | 0.842 \pm 0.022 | 0.159 \pm 0.021 | 0.756 \pm 0.026 | 0.585 \pm 0.036 | 0.550 \pm 0.053 | 0.488 \pm 0.048 |
| Federated, \alpha = 1 | 0.857 \pm 0.033 | 0.426 \pm 0.210 | 0.582 \pm 0.051 | 0.337 \pm 0.046 | 0.294 \pm 0.038 | 0.127 \pm 0.076 |

8

---

<!-- Page 9 -->

MY, Li, RJ, Chen, D, Kong et al.

Medical Image Analysis 76 (2022) 102298

Table 5RCC subtyping test performance reported as five-fold mean (s.d.).

|   | AUC \uparrow | Error \downarrow | bAUC | F1 \uparrow | mAP \uparrow | Cohen's \kappa \uparrow |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Site 1 only | 0.947 \pm 0.017 | 0.165 \pm 0.013 | 0.802 \pm 0.033 | 0.813 \pm 0.021 | 0.903 \pm 0.026 | 0.704 \pm 0.029 |
| Site 2 only | 0.939 \pm 0.008 | 0.185 \pm 0.012 | 0.812 \pm 0.036 | 0.805 \pm 0.023 | 0.898 \pm 0.019 | 0.685 \pm 0.027 |
| Site 3 only | 0.984 \pm 0.024 | 0.219 \pm 0.038 | 0.772 \pm 0.046 | 0.762 \pm 0.050 | 0.817 \pm 0.035 | 0.623 \pm 0.043 |
| Site 4 only | 0.943 \pm 0.015 | 0.163 \pm 0.032 | 0.825 \pm 0.037 | 0.815 \pm 0.039 | 0.899 \pm 0.028 | 0.775 \pm 0.037 |
| Centralized | 0.985 \pm 0.004 | 0.081 \pm 0.018 | 0.912 \pm 0.023 | 0.916 \pm 0.019 | 0.970 \pm 0.009 | 0.856 \pm 0.033 |
| Federated | 0.976 \pm 0.007 | 0.106 \pm 0.012 | 0.890 \pm 0.028 | 0.881 \pm 0.015 | 0.956 \pm 0.015 | 0.811 \pm 0.025 |
| Federated, \alpha = 0.001 | 0.976 \pm 0.007 | 0.107 \pm 0.023 | 0.896 \pm 0.034 | 0.883 \pm 0.030 | 0.956 \pm 0.014 | 0.814 \pm 0.046 |
| Federated, \alpha = 0.1 | 0.976 \pm 0.006 | 0.105 \pm 0.017 | 0.896 \pm 0.027 | 0.885 \pm 0.021 | 0.954 \pm 0.018 | 0.813 \pm 0.033 |
| Federated, \alpha = 1 | 0.974 \pm 0.007 | 0.101 \pm 0.010 | 0.900 \pm 0.020 | 0.891 \pm 0.009 | 0.953 \pm 0.014 | 0.823 \pm 0.020 |
| Centralized | 0.789 \pm 0.052 | 0.254 \pm 0.180 | 0.402 \pm 0.090 | 0.296 \pm 0.102 | 0.661 \pm 0.077 | 0.068 \pm 0.071 |

Fig. 4. Patient stratification and interpretability for weakly-supervised federated survival prediction. Patients in the test set were stratified into high risk and low risk groups using the median (50% percentile) of the model's predicted risk score distribution as the cutoff and the log-rank test was used to assess the statistical significance between survival distributions of the resulting risk groups. Top: Increasing \alpha by two orders of magnitude for stronger guarantees on differential privacy did not eliminate the model's ability to stratify patients into statistically significant (p-value < 0.05) different risk groups. Bottom: Examples of Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma patients predicted as high-risk and low-risk respectively by the model, the original H&E (left), attention-batch heatmap (center), and highest-attention patches (right). As compared to the subtyping classification problem, since survival analysis is an ordinal regression problem, the high attention patches correspond to regions with high prognostic relevance in stratifying patients into low versus high risk groups. The highest attention patches for the high-risk case focus predominantly on the tumor cells themselves, while the highest attention patches for the low risk case focus predominantly on lymphocytes within the stroma and directly interfacing with tumor cells, which corroborates with the known prognostic relevance of tumor-immune co-localization in pathology.

Table 6CRCCC survival prediction test performance reported as five-fold mean (s.d.).

|   | c-Index | AUC | P-Value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Site 1 only | 0.502 \pm 0.018 | 0.513 \pm 0.032 | 0.937 |
| Site 2 only | 0.509 \pm 0.017 | 0.524 \pm 0.044 | 0.962 |
| Site 3 only | 0.645 \pm 0.064 | 0.674 \pm 0.077 | 9.14 \times 10^{-4} |
| Site 4 only | 0.655 \pm 0.043 | 0.798 \pm 0.051 | 1.19 \times 10^{-4} |
| Centralized | 0.683 \pm 0.064 | 0.719 \pm 0.070 | 2.88 \times 10^{-4} |
| Federated, \alpha = 0 | 0.639 \pm 0.090 | 0.664 \pm 0.103 | 1.52 \times 10^{-3} |
| Federated, \alpha = 0.001 | 0.648 \pm 0.099 | 0.672 \pm 0.111 | 2.39 \times 10^{-3} |
| Federated, \alpha = 0.1 | 0.647 \pm 0.085 | 0.672 \pm 0.098 | 2.52 \times 10^{-3} |
| Federated, \alpha = 1 | 0.598 \pm 0.036 | 0.554 \pm 0.044 | 0.805 |

among the original tissue source sites in the TCGA. In settings where the data at a single institution are insufficient (e.g. site 1 and 2) in either size or diversity to yield a meaningful, generalizable model, soliciting data from collaborating institutions or other external sources may be necessary. On the other hand, we found that federated learning can overcome this challenge as all models trained in the federated framework (with the exception of when using \alpha = 1) resulted in statistical significance (p-value < 0.05) and produced reasonable performance both in terms of c-Index values and average cumulative/dynamic AUC.

Similar to classification, we visualized attention heatmaps over the entire WSI for low risk (long survival) and high risk (short survival)

9

---

<!-- Page 10 -->

MY, Lu, RJ, Chen, D, Kong et al.

Medical Image Analysis 76 (2022) 102928

Table 7

BRCA subtyping performance tested on intra vs. inter-site test data, reported as five-fold mean (±s.d.).

| BRCA subtyping performance | Site 1 | Site 2 | Site 3 | Site 4 | All (Macro-avg) | All (Macro-avg) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Centralized | 0.929±0.034 | 0.883±0.055 | 0.887±0.060 | 0.938±0.022 | 0.909±0.013 | 0.919±0.013 |
| Site 1 only | 0.841±0.025 | 0.776±0.063 | 0.786±0.074 | 0.853±0.023 | 0.814±0.022 | 0.819±0.018 |
| Site 2 only | 0.703±0.143 | 0.739±0.090 | 0.782±0.045 | 0.847±0.039 | 0.768±0.052 | 0.752±0.098 |
| Site 3 only | 0.620±0.108 | 0.713±0.132 | 0.772±0.084 | 0.798±0.077 | 0.762±0.085 | 0.698±0.070 |
| Site 4 only | 0.895±0.051 | 0.794±0.042 | 0.828±0.045 | 0.853±0.042 | 0.798±0.031 | 0.788±0.037 |
| Federated | 0.859±0.046 | 0.838±0.077 | 0.837±0.041 | 0.919±0.024 | 0.863±0.024 | 0.862±0.025 |

Table 8

CRC subtyping performance tested on intra vs. inter-site test data, reported as five-fold mean (±s.d.).

| Site 1 | Site 1 | Site 2 | Site 3 | Site 4 | All (Macro-avg) | All (Macro-avg) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Centralized | 0.992±0.007 | 0.978±0.012 | 0.982±0.015 | 0.983±0.005 | 0.984±0.007 | 0.985±0.004 |
| Site 1 only | 0.981±0.019 | 0.928±0.023 | 0.970±0.016 | 0.947±0.018 | 0.958±0.012 | 0.951±0.017 |
| Site 2 only | 0.932±0.032 | 0.976±0.021 | 0.972±0.021 | 0.950±0.015 | 0.933±0.009 | 0.939±0.008 |
| Site 3 only | 0.943±0.020 | 0.846±0.057 | 0.980±0.021 | 0.877±0.050 | 0.911±0.026 | 0.894±0.024 |
| Site 4 only | 0.958±0.021 | 0.914±0.022 | 0.936±0.036 | 0.984±0.006 | 0.942±0.016 | 0.943±0.015 |
| Federated | 0.990±0.008 | 0.967±0.013 | 0.971±0.016 | 0.985±0.004 | 0.978±0.007 | 0.976±0.007 |

Table 9

CRCCC survival prediction performance tested on intra vs. inter-site test data, reported as five-fold mean (±s.d.).

| Site 1 | Site 2 | Site 3 | Site 4 | All (Macro-avg) | All (Macro-avg) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Centralized | 0.577±0.105 | 0.625±0.148 | 0.709±0.067 | 0.692±0.043 | 0.646±0.068 |
| Site 1 only | 0.463±0.132 | 0.449±0.070 | 0.522±0.039 | 0.502±0.018 | 0.478±0.055 |
| Site 2 only | 0.475±0.076 | 0.566±0.062 | 0.491±0.029 | 0.506±0.017 | 0.511±0.028 |
| Site 3 only | 0.651±0.119 | 0.577±0.119 | 0.685±0.027 | 0.645±0.064 | 0.636±0.051 |
| Federated | 0.594±0.090 | 0.506±0.177 | 0.729±0.062 | 0.683±0.044 | 0.640±0.097 |

vial) patients in order to interpret the regions and morphological features learned by the weakly-supervised model to be of high prognostic relevance (Fig. 4).

#### 3.4. Intra- and inter-center performance

The ability of a trained AI model to generalize to unseen, heterogeneous data with population and institutional-site specific variations is not only desirable but also crucial to its reliability and usability in real-world settings. As such, for both classification and survival prediction tasks, we examine more closely the intra- versus inter-center performance of different approaches. As expected, federated learning not only enables better generalization on average, as measured by the micro- and macro-averaged scores (ROC AUC for classification and c-indexes for survival prediction) across all sites, but is also mostly competitive in performance against models developed using data from their respective intra-center portion of the test data (Tables 7, 8, 9).

#### 3.5. Comparison of weakly-supervised survival prediction and existing strategies

In this section, we investigate the effectiveness of the proposed weakly-supervised survival prediction model for two hyper-parameter choices, and in comparison with existing strategies such as manual grading by pathologists (low vs. high fuhrman nuclear grade) in combination with other covariates such as age and gender on the aforementioned TCGA-KIRC dataset (n=511). Both the “Grade” only and “Grade + Age + Gender” methods are trained based on the Cox proportional hazard models using the same 5-fold splits as the weakly-supervised survival models are trained on the “centralized” set-ting (without using federated learning). We observed that in general the performance difference between the deep learning model trained using different data values was a few percents, with R = 8 performing the best for the particular task (Table 11). Additionally we note that the Cox proportional

hazard model based on nuclear grade lags behind the weakly-supervised deep learning-based approach, and only matches its performance when combined with additional variables including age and gender, beyond histologic features made available to the deep learning model.

#### 3.6. Altruizing hyperparameter choices in federated averaging

Instead of aggregating the weights of local models after each epoch, a less frequent communication pace can be used. We investigated model performance for each task by varying E, the number of epochs each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance across each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance across each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance across each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance across each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance across each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance across each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance across each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance across each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance across each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance across each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance across each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance across each local model is updated before communicating with the central model for aggregation, for E = \{1, 2, 4, 8\}. As shown in Table 10, for classification tasks, the resulting performance

---

<!-- Page 11 -->

MY, Lu, RJ, Chen, D, Kong et al.

Medical Image Analysis 76 (2022) 102928

Fig. 5. Performance comparison between simple averaging vs. weighted averaging. Performance in terms of AUC ROC for classification and c-index for survival prediction is shown for federated averaging across different levels of \alpha. Error bars show s.d. from 5-fold cross-validation.

#### Table 11

Survival prediction performance for different choices of R and comparison with existing approaches, reported as five-fold mean (\pms.d.).

| Approach | c-index | AUC | P-Value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Grade | 0.648 \pm 0.047 | 0.668 \pm 0.058 | 0.272 |
| Grade + Age + Gender | 0.693 \pm 0.050 | 0.716 \pm 0.065 | 0.193 |
| R = 2 | 0.681 \pm 0.047 | 0.708 \pm 0.044 | 1.28 \times 10^{-4} |
| R = 4 | 0.685 \pm 0.020 | 0.723 \pm 0.022 | 6.38 \times 10^{-4} |
| R = 6 | 0.678 \pm 0.033 | 0.713 \pm 0.033 | 7.58 \times 10^{-4} |
| R = 8 | 0.692 \pm 0.043 | 0.732 \pm 0.048 | 1.39 \times 10^{-4} |

overly on their local training data when a longer communication cycle is used.

In addition to the weighted averaging aggregation used in the originally proposed federated averaging algorithm, where y_i = \sum_j w_{ij} y_j, and the contribution of each local model is weighted proportionally to the size of its training set, we investigate the alternative choice used by Li et al. (2020a), y_i = \frac{1}{N_i}, where uniform weights are used for averaging the updated weights of different local models in each training round. The results are shown for both classification and survival tasks and for different levels of \alpha (Fig. 5), where minimal differences between the two design choices were observed.

## 4. Conclusion

Over the past several years, computational pathology has seen enormous growth due to deep learning achieving “clinical-grade” performance on many clinically-relevant pathology tasks. As a result, AI algorithms for pathology data have received considerable attention as an support decision system in assisting clinicians in pathology and laboratory diagnostic services. Our recent approval given to weakly-supervised AI algorithms for cancer diagnosis. Despite these breakthroughs, the development and validation in AI algorithms in pathology have been mainly limited to single-institutional datasets, which may not generalize at deployment time due to variations in the underlying patient population, staining protocols, and scanner hardware. Federated learning has been suggested as a path forward in enabling differential privacy and overcoming stagnant healthcare interoperability for sharing sensitive medical data. With increasing demand for multi-institutional studies for validating clinical algorithms in pathology, the robust validation of federated learning systems, in both differential-privacy and model performance, is urgently needed to enable col-

laboration and validation of all AI systems that would participate in medical decision making.

In this work, we demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of applying federated, attention-based weakly-supervised learning for general purpose classification and survival prediction on gigapixel whole slide images from different sites, without the need for institutions to directly share potentially sensitive patient data. Our proposed framework opens the possibility for multiple institutions to integrate their WSI datasets and train a more robust model that tends to generalize better on unseen data than models developed on data from a single institution, while also allowing participating institutions to preserve differential privacy via a randomized mechanism. Backed by a flexible and interpretable attention-based weakly-supervised learning framework, we believe our federated learning framework has the clear potential to be applied to many important computational pathology tasks beyond what we have already shown in this study.

Decreasing barriers to cross-institutional collaborations in this way will be key to the future development of computational pathology tools. This is especially true in two applications: (1) rare diseases, where a single institution may not possess enough cases of a single entity to train an effective model on its own due to a lack of diversity in morphology, and (2) global health, in which AI algorithms are deployed and finetuned in low- and middle-income countries that lack access to pathology and laboratory medicine services (Nabi, 2018; Anglade et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2021). These techniques may also be useful in situations where transferring large quantities of physical or digital slides may be impossible due to institutional or governmental regulations. Models that give institutions greater control over their data while still achieving at or near state-of-the-art perfor- mance will be instrumental in progress towards democratized computational pathology.

## Ethics oversight

This study was approved by the Mass General Brigham (MGB) IRB office under protocol 2020P000233.

## Declaration of Competing Interest

COI Statement The following applies to all authors included in this study. O All authors have participated in (a) conception and design, (b) administrative work, (c) data, (d) drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content; and (e) approval of the final version. O This manuscript has not

11

---

<!-- Page 12 -->

MY, Lu, RJ, Chen, D Kong et al.

Medicine (Baltimore) 2022; 102:2028

been submitted to, nor is under review at, another journal or other publishing venue. The authors have no conflict of interest with any organization with a direct or indirect financial interest in the subject matter discussed in the manuscript.

### CRediT authorship contribution statement

Ming Y. Lu: Conceptualization, Visualization, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Richard J. Chen: Conceptualization, Visualization, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Dehan Kong: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Jana Lihovak: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Yanru Chen: Writing – review & editing. Drew EK. Williamson: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Tiffany Y. Chen: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Faisal Mahmood: Conceptualization, Visualization, Writing – review & editing.

### Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Alexander Bruce for scanning internal cohorts of patient histology slides at BWH; Jing-wen Wang for scanning the data from the NIH archive; and for providing the BWH slide database and retrieving archival slides; Martina Bragg, Sarah Zimm and Terri Mellen for administrative support; and the BWH staff for their assistance in part by internal funds. Ann BWH Pathology, NIH National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) R35GM138216 (to E.M.), Google Cloud Research Grant and the Nevada CPU Grant Program, R.J.C. was additionally supported and grateful to Graduate School of Medicine. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not reflect the official views of the NIH, NIGMS, NHGRI or the NSF.

### References

Abadi, M., Chu, A., Goodfellow, I., McMahan, H.B., Mirzouli, I., Talwar, K., Zhang, L., 2016. Deep learning with differential privacy. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery in Data Mining. New York, NY, 1–16. Anand, D., Gadgil, S., Sethi, A., 2020. Histograms: graphs in histopathology. Medical Society of the State of New York. In: Medical Society of the State of New York. Andrews, M., Manuel, A., Menner, R., Sallard, C., Simpson, C., 2020. A Federated survival analysis with digitized pathology. In: Proceedings of the 2020 ACM International Conference, MI, du Terrail, JQ., Bogner, C., Tramel, EAV, 2020. Sliced federated learning for multi-center histopathology datasets. In: Domain Adaptation and Representation Transfer, and Distributed and Collaborative Learning. Springer, pp. 1281–1291.

Alvarez-Farise, F., Miller, D., Brock, J.E., 2020. Can pathology diagnostic services for cancer be stratified and serve global health? Cancer 126, 2431–2438.

Bera, A., Kishimoto, K.A., 2020. Pathomics Vision: A Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence in digital pathology—new tools for diagnosis and precision oncology. International Journal of Oncology 56, 1211–1218.

Brisim, T.S., Chen, R.L., Mela, T., Olshewsky, A., Pachtolits, I.C., Shi, W., 2018. Federated learning of predictive models in histopathology. IEEE Access 6, 372–382.

Chen, J., Hsu, J., Hsu, H., Obergans, H., Vink, R., de Feij, T., van Ginsbergen, B., van der Laak, J., Hulbigen-van de Kaa, C., Litjens, C., 2020. Automated deep-learning system for glioma grading and histopathology datasets: an integrated framework for testing histopathology and genomic features for cancer diagnosis and prognosis. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 39, 2231–2241.

Chen, R.J., Lu, M.Y., Wang, J., Williamson, D.E.K., Rotig, S.J., Lindeman, N.I., 2020. Federated learning: A systematic fusion: an integrated framework for testing histopathology and genomic features for cancer diagnosis and prognosis. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 39, 2231–2241.

Chen, Y., Qiu, X., Wang, J., Yu, C., Gao, W., 2019. Federated: a federated transfer learning framework for multi-center histopathology. IEEE Access 7, 470–476.

Cheung, A., Smith, A., Ullman, J., Zuber, D., Zihlwayo, M., 2019. Distributed differential privacy for multi-institutional histopathology. IEEE Access 7, 372–382.

Carlin, N., Ellison, C., Thompson, U., Applications of Cryptographic Techniques. Springer, 2019. Differential privacy: A survey. IEEE Access 7, 207–248.

Carlin, N., Liu, C., Ellingson, U., Kos, J. and Song, D., 2019. The secret shaver: Evaluating and testing unimpaired memorization in neural networks. In: 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery in Data (pp. 287–288).

Choudhary, O., Gkoulalas-Dianioti, A., Seleniotis, T., Sylla, I., Park, Y., Heu, G., Bas, A., 2019. Federated learning for histopathology. IEEE Access 7, 372–382. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2910278.

Choudhary, O., Park, Y., Heu, G., Bas, A., Gkoulalas-Dianioti, A., Sylla, I., et al., 2019. Predicting adverse drug reactions on distributed health data using federated learning. In: Proceedings of the ACM Annual Symposium Proceedings, American Medical Informatics Association, p. 313.

Coudray, N., Ocampo, J.S., Palakapandyan, T., Nanda, N., Smudel, M., Femp, D., Moritz, C., Schöth, M., 2018. Deep learning for histopathology and mutational profiling from non-small cell lung cancer histopathology images using deep learning. MedRxiv preprint arXiv:1809.10307.

Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R.J., Li, L.J., K.-F. Fei, L., 2009. ImageNet: a large-scale hierarchical image database. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE, pp. 2488–2555.

Deng, J., Roth, A., & Su, W.J. (2019). Gaussian differential privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.02833.

Dwork, C., Roth, A., McSherry, F., Minnes, I., Naei, M., 2006. Data, our selves: privacy via distributed noise generation. In: Proceedings of the Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques. IEEE, pp. 129–140.

Dwork, C., Both, A., et al., 2014. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.1732.

Geiping, J., Bauermeister, H., Broge, H., Moeller, M., 2020. Inverting gradients how accurate is the inverse? In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE, pp. 10516–10521.

Haddell, R., Balcan, M.F., Im, H., Edis, A., 2019. Neural Inference Processing System for histopathology. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.02833.

Graham, S., Vu, Q.D., Raza, S.E.A., Azam, A., Tang, Y.W., Kwak, J.T., Rajpoot, N., 2019. Visual histology images database. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.02833.

Hilg, E., Armenone, G., Perez-Gonz, P.J., 2017. Deep models under the hood: the ACM SIGKDD Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 603–618.

Hu, J., 2019. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.02833. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.02833.

Ilie, M., 2019. Federated learning: A literature-based deep multiple instance learning. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, pp. 115–124.

Jagadeesh, K.A., Wu, D.J., Birgmer, J.A., Boned, B., Bejerman, G., 2017. Deriving genomic diagnoses without revealing patient genomes. Science 357, 652–655.

Jacob, J., Kirsch, J., 2019. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.02833.

Ji, W., Epstein, D., Sreed, D., Rajpoot, N., 2020. Cellular community detection for tissue phenotyping in colorectal cancer histology. Med. Image Anal. 63, 101741.

Ji, C., Gao, D., Mane, R., Tan, J., Liu, Y., Guan, C., 2020. Jolly Federated transfer learning for histopathology. In: Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 2020 IEEE. IEEE, pp. 3048–3054.

Kalantari, M., 2019. Federated learning: A Review. Bennet, M., Bhagaji, A.N., Bonawick, R., Charles, S., Cormode, G., Cummings, R. and D'Olivera, R.C. (Eds.), Federated learning: Theory, methods, and applications. Learning arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

Kalantari, M., 2020. Federated learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04977.

---

<!-- Page 13 -->

MY Li, RJ Chen, D. Kong et al.

Medical Image Analysis 76 (2022) 102298

Muhammad, HJ, Sigel, CS, Campagnella, C., Boerner, T., Pak, LM., Buttner, S., Hirschfeld, JM., Keerthi, S., Kozlowski, M., Jutajit, W.R., et al., 2019. Unsupervised subtyping of cholangiocarcinoma using a deep clustering convolutional autoencoder. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer, pp. 604–612.

Nabi, J., 2018. Artificial intelligence can augment global pathology initiatives. Lancet 392, 2591–2592.

Nazi, M.K.K., Parwani, A.V., Gurcan, M.N., 2019. Digital pathology and artificial intelligence. Lancet Oncol. 20, 253–261.

Pell, R., Olen, K., Robinson, M., Ferman, H., Rajpoot, N., Ritscher, J., Sneed, D., Verrell, C., Driskell, O.J., et al. Quality assurance working group. UNICLINICMPCF. 2019. The use of digital pathology and image analysis in clinical trials. J. Pathol. Clin. Res. 5, 81–90.

Rehm, H., 2017. Evolving health care through personal genomics. Nat. Rev. Genet. 18, 259–267.

Rehe, N., Hancock, J., Li, W., Millettari, F., Roth, H.R., Albarquini, S., Bakas, S., Gattler, M.N., Landman, B.A., Maier-Hein, K., et al. 2020. The future of digital health with federated learning. NJ Digit. Med. 3, 1–7.

Rocher, L., Henderson, J.M., De Montjoye, Y.A., 2019. Estimating the success of re-identifications in incomplete datasets using generative models. Nat. Commun. 10, 1–9.

Roy, A.G., Siddiqui, S., Pavletsi, S., Navda, K., Wachinger, C., 2019. BrainInfrent: a peer-to-peer environment for decentralized federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06731.

Schultheis, D., Jackson, H.W., Raghuraman, S., Fischer, J.R., Zanotelli, V.R., Schulz, D., Gesen, C., Catena, R., Varga, Z., Bodenmiller, B., 2017. Histocat: analysis of cell phenotypes and interactions in multiple image cytometry data. Nat. Methods 14, 873.

Scheeleer, J., Jenca, M., Techagia, S., Troncoso-Pastoriza, J.R., Balsam, J.L., Hubaux, J.P., Fellay, J., Vayena, E., 2020. Data protection and ethics requirements for multiple protection with health data: a comparative examination of legislative governance frameworks and the role of data protection technologies. J. Law Biosci. 7, 1.

Sheller, M.J., Reina, G.A., Edwards, B., Martin, J., Bakas, S., 2018. Multi-institutional deep learning modeling without sharing patient data: a feasibility study on brain tumor segmentation. In: Proceedings of the International MICCAI Brain-Lesion Workshop. Springer, pp. 92–104.

Shkiri, R., Shmalioti, V., 2015. Privacy-preserving deep learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 1310–1321.

Silva, S., Gutman, B.A., Romero, E., Thompson, P.M., Altman, A., Lorenzi, M., 2019. Federated learning in distributed medical databases: meta-analysis of large-scale subcortical brain data. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 16th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). IEEE, pp. 270–274.

Tutz, G., Schmitt, M., et al. 2016. Modeling Discrete Time-to-Event Data. Springer.

Wang, J., Chen, R.J., Liu, M.Y., Baras, A., Mahmood, F., 2020. Weakly supervised prostate tma classification via graph convolutional networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 17th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). IEEE, pp. 239–243.

Wang, Z., Song, M., Zhang, Z., Song, Y., Wang, Q., Qi, H., 2019. Beyond inferring class representatives: user-level privacy leakage from federated learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, pp. 2512–2520.

Xiao, J., Yu, J.G., Liu, Z., Ou, Y., Deng, S., Yang, Z., Li, Y., 2020. Consent-aware deep ordinal regression for survival prediction from pathological images. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer, pp. 449–458.

Yamamoto, Y., Tsuzuki, T., Akiyama, J., Ueda, M., Murakawa, H., Numa, A., Takahara, H., Tsuyuki, T., Tsutsumi, K., Nakazawa, R., et al. 2019. Automated acquisition of explainable knowledge from unannotated histopathology- ogy images. Nat. Commun. 10, 1–9.

Yang, Q., Liu, Y., Chen, T., Tong, Y., 2019. Federated machine learning: concept and applications. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. 10(7), 1–19.

Zadeh, S.G., Schmid, M., 2020. Bias in cross-entropy-based training of deep survival networks. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 43, 3129–3137.

Zhang, Y., Jia, R., Pei, H., Wang, W., Li, B., Song, D., 2020. The secret reveal: generative model-mission attacks against deep neural networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 253–261.

Zhou, Y., Graham, S., Alemi Koochabani, N., Shaban, M., Heng, P.A., Rajpoot, N., 2019. CCG-net: cell graph convolutional network for grading of colorectal cancer histology images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops 0–0.

Zhu, L., Liu, Z., Han, S., 2019. Deep leakage from gradients. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 14774–14784.

13