

<!-- PAGE 1 -->

# communications medicine

Article

# Preserving fairness and diagnostic accuracy in private large-scale AI models for medical imaging

Soroosh Tayebi Arasteh
^1^
*, Alexander Ziller
^2,3,4,5,6^
, Christiane Kuhl
^7^
, Marcus Makowski
^8^
, Yvon Nebeling
^9^
, Rickmer Braren
^8^
*, Daniel Rueckert
^8^
*, Daniel Truhn
^1,2,3,4,5,6^
*, Georgios Kaissis
^2,3,4,5,6^
Check for updates

## Abstract

**Background**
 Artificial intelligence (AI) models are increasingly used in the medical domain. However, as medical data is highly sensitive, special precautions to ensure its protection are required. The gold standard for privacy preservation is the introduction of differential privacy (DP) to model training. Prior work indicates that DP has negative implications on model accuracy and fairness, which are unacceptable in medicine and represent a main barrier to the widespread use of privacy-preserving techniques. In this work, we evaluated the effect of privacy-preserving training of AI models regarding accuracy and fairness compared to non-private training.
**Methods**
 We used two datasets: (1) A large dataset (N = 193,311) of high quality clinical chest radiographs, and (2) a dataset (N = 1625) of 3D abdominal computed tomography (CT) images, with the task of classifying the presence of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Both were retrospectively collected and manually labeled by experienced radiologists. We then compared non-private deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and privacy-preserving (DP) models with respect to privacy-utility trade-offs measured as area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC), and privacy-fairness trade-offs, measured as Pearson's r or Statistical Parity Difference.
**Results**
 We find that, while the privacy-preserving training yields lower accuracy, it largely does not imply discrimination against high- or low-comorbidity. However, we find an indication that difficult diagnoses and subgroups suffer stronger performance hits in private training.
**Conclusions**
 Our study shows that—under the challenging realistic circumstances of a real-life clinical dataset—the privacy-preserving training of diagnostic deep learning models is possible with excellent diagnostic accuracy and fairness.

## Plain Language Summary

Artificial intelligence (AI), in which computers can learn to do tasks that normally require human intelligence, is particularly useful in medical imaging. However, AI should be used in a way that preserves patient privacy. We explored the balance between maintaining patient data privacy and AI performance in medical imaging. We use an approach called differential privacy to protect the privacy of patients' images. We show that, although training AI with differential privacy leads to a slight decrease in accuracy, it does not substantially increase bias against different age groups, genders, or patients with multiple health conditions. However, we notice that AI faces more challenges in accurately diagnosing complex cases and specific subgroups when trained under these privacy constraints. These findings highlight the importance of designing AI systems that are both privacy-consistent and capable of reliable diagnoses across patient groups.
The development of artificial intelligence (AI) systems for medical applications represents a delicate trade-off. On the one hand, diagnostic models must offer high accuracy and certainty, as well as treat different patient groups equitably and fairly. On the other hand, clinicians and researchers
are subject to ethical and legal responsibilities towards the patients whose data is used for model training. In particular, when diagnostic models are published to third parties whose intentions are impossible to verify, care must be undertaken to ascertain that patient privacy is not compromised.
^1^
Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany. 
^2^
Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 
^3^
Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare and Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 
^4^
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. 
^5^
Institute for Machine Learning in Biomedical Imaging, Helmholtz Munich, Neuherberg, Germany. 
^6^
These authors contributed equally: Soroosh Tayebi Arasteh, Alexander Ziller. 
^7^
These authors jointly supervised this work: Daniel Truhn, Georgios Kaissis. 
^8^
E-mail: soroosh.arasteh@rwth-aachen.de; alex.ziller@tum.de; druhn@ukaachen.de; g.kaissis@tum.de
1
Communications Medicine (2024)44

<!-- PAGE 2 -->

Privacy breaches can occur, e.g., through data reconstruction, attribute inference or membership inference attacks against the shared model. Federated learning
^1^
 has been proposed as a tool to address some of these problems, but it has been shown that the model data can be reconstructed from federated systems, rendering them just as vulnerable to the privacy attacks as centralized models. It is apparent that the formal privacy preservation methods are required to protect the patients whose data is used to train diagnostic AI models. The gold standard in this regard is differential privacy (DP).
^2^

Much, if not all, currently deployed machine learning models are trained using the formal privacy guarantee of DP. We note that such models crucially employ such techniques in federated scenarios, where more granular information about the training process can be extracted, or even reconstructed, from the model parameters than by a malicious participant.
^3^
 Moreover, trained models can be attacked to extract training data through so-called model inversion attacks.
^4^
 We also note that such attacks work better if the models have been trained on less data, which is especially concerning given how even the most basic AI algorithms have been trained on over 1000 cases.
^5^
 Coating a one-shot correspondence between a successful attack and the resulting “privacy risk” requires a case-by-case analysis. The legal framework of DP (GDPR) seems to have converged on the notion of singling out/re-identification. Even from the perspective of the framework of DP, the ability to identify a member of a population
^6^
 rather than directly specifying “privacy requirements,” DP can be seen as the optimal tool as it can quantitatively bound both the risk of re-identification (mild “ID”) and the risk of membership inference (stronger “ID”) as was also shown empirically for both aforementioned attack classes.
^7,8^
 It is apparent from Table 10, contrasted with the formal guarantees such as k-anonymity, provably protects against the notion of singling out.
^9^

DP is a formal framework encompassing a collection of techniques to allow for data to remain within its original context while guaranteeing the protection of individual data points within them. DP thus is a property of the training process which is not a property of the computation. A sensitive dataset must be approximately identical whether or not any single individual was included or excluded from the dataset. Formally, a randomized mechanism 
M
 satisfies 
\epsilon
-DP (or 
\epsilon
-differential privacy) if for all pairs of databases 
D, D' \in \mathcal{D}
, which differ in one row and all 
\mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{D}
, the following holds:

\Pr(M(D) \in \mathcal{S}) \le \Pr(M(D') \in \mathcal{S}) + \delta \quad (1)

where the guarantee is given over the randomness of 
M
 and holds equally for all 
\mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{D}
. The parameter 
\epsilon
 is a small positive number. DP is a property given from a data processor to a data owner that the risks of adverse events which can occur due to the inclusion of their data in a database are bounded consistently for risks of each data point. It is not inclusive of other parameters 
\delta
 and 
\epsilon
 together form what is typically called a privacy budget. 
\epsilon
 and 
\delta
 correspond to the amount of privacy guarantee that is consumed versus. With some terminological laxity, 
\epsilon
 can be considered a measure of the privacy loss incurred, whereas 
\delta
 represents a (small) probability that this privacy loss exceeded, for deep learning workflows, it is set to the inverse of the database size. We note that, although mechanisms exist where 
\epsilon
 and 
\delta
 are interpretable, privacy guarantees are not. The Gaussian mechanism used to train neural networks does not exhibit this behavior. The fact that quantitative privacy guarantees can be computed from the training process (computationally expensive) makes it difficult to use to train neural networks is unique to DP. This process is typically referred to as privacy accounting. The formal guarantee of the training randomization required by DP is ensured through the addition of calibrated Gaussian noise to the gradients of the loss function computed for each individual data point after the training process. This is known to ensure their magnitude is “bounded,” where the clipping threshold is an additional hyperparameter of the training process.
^10^

DP does not only offer formal protection, but several works have also empirically shown the connection between the privacy budget and the amount of membership inference and data reconstruction attacks.
^11^
 We note that absolute privacy (i.e., zero risk) is only possible if no information is present.
^12^
 In this case, the use of encryption methods, which are the de-facto privacy standard in the medical domain, is the only solution, e.g., via homomorphic encryption does, however, not offer such perfect privacy guarantees. In this regard, it is important to note that DP has been revealed at inference time through the model’s predictions. Thus, without the protection of differential privacy, no formal barrier stands between the sensitive data and an attacker. The formal guarantee of the training attack algorithm, which are usually not controllable a priori. DP offers the ability to “compute” bound the amount of privacy loss incurred by the model, and draw conclusions from the data. Determining the exact privacy budget is challenging, as it is a matter of policy. The technical perspective can provide insight into the appropriate budget level, as it is possible to determine the risk of a successful attack at a given privacy budget compared to the model utility that can be achieved. The trade-off between model utility and privacy preservation are also a matter of ethical, societal and political debate. The model utility is a measure of the model’s ability to make accurate predictions (“privacy-utility trade-off”), i.e., a reduction in diagnostic accuracy when stronger privacy guarantees are required.
^13^
 The other trade-off is between model utility and model interpretability, where the model’s ability to make less about under-represented patient groups
^14^
 in the training data is a key concern. The model’s ability to make accurate predictions (“privacy or diagnosis”). Both of these trade-offs are delicate in sensitive applications, such as medical ones, as it is not acceptable to have wrong diagnoses or to have a model that is not diagnosable for certain patient groups.

The need for the use of differential privacy (DP) has been illustrated by Pichler et al.
^15^
 who showed that the use of DP can be used to protect the same patient, which directly enables re-identification attacks; this was similarly shown in tabular databases by Narayanan et al.
^16^
 The training of deep neural networks on medical data with DP has so far not been widely investigated. Li et al.
^17^
 investigated privacy-utility trade-offs in the combination of DP and federated learning, and the use of DP in medical data for tumor segmentation dataset. They find that DP introduces a considerable reduction in model accuracy in the given setting. Hlatamzid et al.
^18^
 illustrated that use of DP in a federated learning setting can be used for privacy settings. Ziegler et al.
^19^
 reported similar findings when evaluating privacy-utility trade-offs in the use of DP in the diagnosis of COVID-19. These results also align with our previous work,
^20^
 where we demonstrated the utilization of a suite of privacy-preserving techniques for pneumonia classification in pediatric chest X-rays. However, the focus of our work was not to elucidate privacy-utility or privacy-fairness trade-offs, but to showcase the feasibility of using privacy-preserving techniques in the medical domain with good accuracy on decentralized data while minimizing data privacy and governance concerns. Moreover, we demonstrated that empirical data can be used to train models that are not inclusive of the training data parameters, the work did not consider differential diagnosis but only coarse-level classification.

In this work, we aim to elucidate the connection between using formal privacy techniques and the fairness towards underrepresented groups in the setting of medical AI use cases. This is an important challenge given the deployment of ethical AI algorithms in such sensitive areas. However, as we have shown, the use of DP in the training of deep neural networks is not well understood. We thus contend that the widespread use of privacy-preserving machine learning requires testing under real-life circumstances. In the current study, we perform real-life DP experiments using the utility of the model to utilize a large clinical database of radiologist-labeled radiographic images. We also propose a new privacy-preserving technique that is more robust, but otherwise not been curated or pre-processed for privacy training in any way. Furthermore, we analyze a dataset of abdominal 3D computed tomography images to demonstrate the use of DP in the training of deep neural networks (DNNs). This mirrors the type of datasets available in the medical domain today. We then demonstrate the use of privacy-utility and privacy-fairness trade-offs in training advanced computer vision architectures.

<!-- PAGE 3 -->

The best of our knowledge, our study is the first work to investigate the use of differential privacy in the training of complex diagnostic AI models on a real-world dataset of magnitude (nearly 200,000 samples) and a 3D classification task, and to include an extensive evaluation of privacy/utility and privacy-fairness trade-offs.

Our results are of interest to medical practitioners, deep learning experts in the medical field and regulatory bodies such as legislative institutions, institutional review boards and data protection officers and we undertook specific care to formulate our main lines of investigation across the important axes delineated above, namely the provision of objective metrics of diagnostic accuracy, privacy protection and demographic fairness towards diverse patient subgroups.

Our main contributions can be summarized as follows: (i) We study the diagnostic accuracy/number of differentially private deep learning on two curated databases of medically relevant use-cases. We reach 97% of the non-private AUCROC on the UKA-CKR dataset through the utilization of transfer learning on public datasets and careful choice of architecture. On the PDAC dataset, our private model at 
\epsilon=0.8
 is not statistically significantly inferior compared to the non-private baseline. (ii) We investigate the fairness implications of differentially private learning with respect to key demographic characteristics such as sex, age and co-morbidity. We find that – while differentially private learning has a mild fairness effect – it does not introduce significant discrimination concerns based on the subgroup representation compared to non-private training, especially at the intermediate privacy budgets typically used in large-scale applications.

## Methods

### Patient cohorts

We employed UKA-CKR
^10^
, a large cohort of chest radiographs. The dataset consists of N=193,311 frontal CXR images of 45,616 patients, all manually labeled by radiologists. The available labels include: pleural effusion, pneumonia, infiltrates, and aortic calcification, each separating for right and left lung, and for the heart and cardiomegaly. The labeling system for cardiomegaly included five classes “normal”, “uncertain”, “borderline”, “enlarged”, and “massively enlarged”. For the rest of the labels, five classes of “negative”, “uncertain”, “mild”, “moderate”, and “severe” were used. Data were split into N=153,502 training and N=39,809 test images using patient-wise stratification, but otherwise completely random selection
^11^
. There was no overlap between the training and test sets. Supplementary Table 1 shows the statistics of the dataset, which are further visualized in Supplementary Figs 1 and 2.

In addition, we used an in-house dataset at Klinikum Rechts der Isar of 1625 abdominal CT scans from unique, consecutive patients, of which 867 suffered from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) (positive) and 758 were a control group without a tumor (negative). We split the dataset into 975 train and 325 validation and test images respectively. During splitting we maintained the ratio of positive and negative samples in all subsets.

The experiments were performed in accordance with relevant national and international guidelines and regulations. Approval for the UKA-CKR dataset by the Ethical Committee of the Medical Faculty of RWTH Aachen University has been granted for this retrospective study (Reference No. EK 228/19). Analogously, for the PDAC dataset, the protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of Klinikum Rechts der Isar (Protocol Number 180/178). Both institutional review boards did not require active informed consent from subjects and/or their legal guardians as this was a retrospective study. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

### Data pre-processing

We used all images of the UKA-CKR dataset to 512 × 512 pixels. Afterward, a normalization scheme as described previously by Johnson et al.
^12^
 was utilized by subtracting the lowest value in the image, dividing by the highest value in the shifted image, truncating values, and converting the result to an unsigned integer, i.e., in the range of [0,255]. Finally, we performed histogram equalization by shifting pixel values towards 0 to towards 255 such that all pixel values 0 through 255 have approximately equal frequencies
^13^
.

We selected a binary classification paradigm for each label. The “negative” and “uncertain” classes (“normal” and “uncertain” for cardiomegaly) were treated as negative while the “mild”, “moderate”, and “severe” classes (“borderline”, “enlarged”, and “massively enlarged” for cardiomegaly) were treated as positive.

For the PDAC dataset, we clipped the voxel density values of all CT scans to an abdominal window from –150 to 250 Hounsfield units and resized to a shape of 224 × 224 × 128 voxels.

**Fig. 1**
 Differences between the private and non-private training process of a neural network. A images from a dataset are fed to a neural network and predictions are made. B From the predictions and the ground truth labels, the gradient is calculated via backpropagation. (c,d) Upper panel: In normal training all gradients are averaged and an update step is performed. (e,f) Lower panel: In private training each per-sample gradient is clipped to a predetermined 
\epsilon
-norm, averaged and noise proportional to the norm is added. This ensures that the information about each sample is upper-bounded and perturbed with sufficient noise.

<!-- PAGE 4 -->

https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00462-6
Article

| Task | Task | Male | Female | Overall | Overall | Overall | Overall | Overall |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task | Task |
| Task | Task | Task | Task</ |

<!-- PAGE 5 -->

Table 1 (continued) Summary of dataset statistics and results

|  | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ | n | μ | σ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

<!-- PAGE 6 -->

subgroups, the statistical parity difference
^20^
 was used which is defined as
P\Gamma = |1C - \text{Minority}| - |1C - \text{Majority}| \quad (2)
where 
Y = 1
 represents correct model predictions and 
C
 is the group in question. Intuitively, it is the difference in classification accuracy between the minority and majority class and thus is optimally zero. Values larger than zero mean that there is a benefit for the minority class, while values smaller than zero mean that the minority class is discriminated against.

### Reporting summary

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.

## Results

### High classification accuracy is attainable despite stringent privacy guarantees

Table 1 shows an overview of our results for all subgroups. Supplementary Tables 2–8 show the per-diagnosis evaluation results for non-DP and DP training for different 
\epsilon
 values. On the UKA-CXR dataset our non-private model achieves an AUROC of 89.71% over all diagnoses. It performs best on pneumonia infiltration on the right (AUROC=94%) while struggling the most to accurately classify cardiomegaly (AUROC=49%). Training with DP decreases all results slightly yet significantly (Hanley & McNeil test-
p
-value < 0.001, 1,000 bootstrapping redraws) and achieves an overall AUROC of 87.56%. The per-diagnosis performance ranges from 92% (pleural effusion right) to 81% AUROC (congestion). We next consider classification size as a very strong level of privacy protection (i.e., 
\epsilon = 1
). Here, at an 
\epsilon
-budget of only 0.29, our model achieves an average AUROC of 83.13% over all diagnoses. A visual overview is displayed in Fig. 2, which shows the average AUROC, accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity values over all labels.
On the PDAT dataset, we found that, while non-private training achieved almost perfect results on the test set the loss in utility for private training at 
\epsilon = 8
 is statistically non-significant (Hanley & McNeil test-
p
-value 0.34, 1,000 independent experiments) compared to non-private training. Again, with lower privacy budgets, model utility decreases, but even at a very low privacy budget of 
\epsilon = 1.08
, we observe an average AUROC score of 95.58%. Moreover, on the UKA-CXR, the use of pre-training helps to boost model performance and reduce the amount of additional information the model needs to learn “from scratch” and consequently reduce the privacy budgets required (refer to Supplementary Fig. 3). This appears to primarily benefit the under-represented groups in the dataset. Conversely, non-private training, whether initialized with pre-training weights or trained from scratch, tends to yield comparable diagnostic results, as the latter network can leverage a greater amount of information. These findings are in line with the observations on the PDAT dataset (where no pretrained weights were available) and show low privacy budgets, specific patient groups suffer a higher discrimination.
For the purpose of further generalization, we replicated the experiments using three other network architectures. All three models displayed a trend consistent with the utility penalties we observed for ResNet18 in both DP and non-DP training (see Supplementary Fig. 4). For further details, we refer to the supplementary information.

### Diagnostic accuracy is correlated with patient age and sample size for both private and non-private models

Fig. 3 shows the difference in classification performance on the UKA-CXR dataset for each diagnosis between the non-private model evaluation and its
Fig. 2 | Average results of training with differential privacy (DP) with different 
\epsilon
 values for 
\delta = 0
. The curves show the average 
\delta
-area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC), (b) accuracy, (c) specificity, and (d) sensitivity values over all labels, including cardiomegaly, congestion, pleural effusion right, pleural effusion left, pneumonia infiltration right, pneumonia infiltration left, aortic aneurysm, and aortic aneurysm left based on 
N = 19,809
 test images. The training
dataset includes 
N = 115,932
 images. Note that the AUROC is monotonically increasing, while sensitivity, specificity and accuracy exhibit more variation. This is due to the fact that with training processes were optimized for the AUROC. Dashed lines correspond to the non-private model results. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
Communications Medicine (2024)4:46

<!-- PAGE 7 -->

Figure 3 | Evaluation results of training with differential privacy (DP) and without DP with different 
\epsilon
 values for 
k=6
–
10^6
. The results show the individual area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUCROC) values for (a) cardiomegaly, (b) congestion, (c) pleural effusion right, (d) pleural effusion left, (e) pneumonic infiltration right, (f) pneumonic infiltration left, (g) atelectasis right, and (h) atelectasis left tested on 
N=39,809
 test images. The training dataset includes 
N=133,532
 images. Dashed lines correspond to the non-private training results. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

<!-- PAGE 8 -->

private counterpart compared to the sample size (that is, the number of available samples with a given label) within our dataset. At an 
\epsilon = 7.89
, the largest difference of AUROC between the non-private and privacy-preserving model was observed for congestion (0.82%) and the smallest difference was observed for plueral effusion right (1.55%; see Fig. 3). Of note, there is a visible trend (Pearson’s 
r \le 0.44
) whereby classes in which the model exhibits good diagnostic performance in the non-private setting also suffer the smallest drop in the private setting. On the other hand, classes that are already difficult to predict in the non-private case determine the most in terms of classification performance with DP (see Supplementary Fig. 9). Both non-private (Pearson’s 
r = 0.72
) and private (Pearson’s 
r = 0.51
) diagnostic AUROC exhibit a weak correlation with the number of samples accessible for each class (see Supplementary Fig. 9). However, the drop in AUROC between private and non-private training is not correlated with the sample size (Pearson’s 
r = 0.06
). On the PdAC dataset, patients with a tumor are overrepresented and in the non-private case diagnosed more accurately. Not surprisingly, the classification performance is thus also higher for private training (see inset for the most restrictive privacy budget (see Supplementary Figs. 5–8).

Furthermore, we evaluated our models based on our range and patient set (Table 1, rows 4 and 5). Additionally, we calculated statistical parity difference for those groups to obtain a measure of fairness (Table 1). On the UCA-CXR dataset all models performed the best on patients younger than 30 years of age. It appears that, the older patients are, the greater the difficulty for the models to predict the labels accurately. Statistical parity difference

**a**
 Average AUROC results over all labels for different age groups

**b**
 Average accuracy results over all labels for different age groups

**c**
 Average sensitivity results over all labels for different age groups

**d**
 Average sensitivity results over all labels for different age groups

Fig. 3 | Average results of training with differential privacy (DP) with different 
\epsilon
 values for 
\epsilon = 0, 10^{-1}, 10^{-2}
, separately for each of the different age groups including (30–39), (40–49), (50–59), (60–69), (70–79), (80–89), and (90+100) years. The curves show the average (a) area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC), (b) accuracy, (c) specificity, and (d) sensitivity values over all labels, including cardiomegaly.

scores are slightly negative for the age groups between 70 and 80 years and older than 80 years for all models, indicating that the models discriminate slightly against those groups. In addition, while for the aforementioned age groups the discrimination does not change with privacy levels, younger patients become more privileged as privacy increases. This finding indicates that – for models which are most protective of data privacy – young patients benefit the most, despite the group of younger patients being smaller overall. For patient sets, models show slightly better performance for female patients and slightly discrimination against male patients (Table 1). Statistical parity does not appear to correlate (Pearson’s 
r \le 0.13
) with privacy levels.

On the PdAC dataset, we observed that, for all levels of privacy including non-private training, classification performance was worse for female patients compared to male patients, who are over-represented in the dataset. However, there is no trend observable between the privacy level and the parity difference. When analysing results of subgroups separated by patient age, we observed similar to UCA-CXR that in all settings, statistical parity differences are on average better for younger patients compared to older ones. Just as in the UCA-CXR dataset, we found that the more restrictive the privacy budget is set, the stronger the privilege enjoyed by younger patients. We furthermore observed that the control group (i.e., tumor) has an over-representation of both male patients and younger patients, which consequently both exhibit better performance compared to the rest of the cohort. Conversely, female patients as well as older patients, have a higher chance of misclassification and are more abundant in the tumor group.

**a**
 Average AUROC results over all labels for different age groups

**b**
 Average accuracy results over all labels for different age groups

**c**
 Average sensitivity results over all labels for different age groups

**d**
 Average sensitivity results over all labels for different age groups

Fig. 4 | Average results of training with differential privacy (DP) with different 
\epsilon
 values for 
\epsilon = 0, 10^{-1}, 10^{-2}
, separately for each of the different age groups including (30–39), (40–49), (50–59), (60–69), (70–79), (80–89), and (90+100) years. The curves show the average (a) area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC), (b) accuracy, (c) specificity, and (d) sensitivity values over all labels, including cardiomegaly.

congestion, pleural effusion right, pleural effusion left, pneumoconiosis right, pneumoconiosis left, embolectomy right, and embolectomy left for each of the N = 19,069 test images. The training dataset includes N = 131,502 images. Dashed lines in corresponding colors correspond to the non-private training results. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

<!-- PAGE 9 -->

https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00462-6
Article
**Fig. 5**
 Average results of training with different privacy (DP) curves with different α values for α × 10
^4^
 separately for female and male samples. The curves show the average (a) area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC), (b) accuracy, (c) specificity, and (d) sensitivity values over all labels, including cardio-remedy, congestion, pleural effusion right, pleural effusion left, pneumonia, infiltration, pneumonia infiltration left, infectious right, and infectious left tested Data
**Discussion**
The main contribution of our paper is to analyze the impact of strong objective guarantees of privacy on the fairness enjoyed by specific patient subgroups in the context of AI model training on real-world medical datasets.
Across all levels of privacy protection, training with DP and all-paired models exhibiting AUROC scores of 83% at the highest privacy level and 87% at α = 7.89 on the UKA-CKR dataset. The fact that the model maintained a relatively high AUROC even at α = 0.29 is remarkable, and we are unaware of any prior work to report such a strong level of privacy protection at this level of model accuracy on clinical data. Our results thus exemplify that, through careful choice of architectures and best practices for the training of DP models, the use of model pretraining on a related public dataset, and the availability of sufficient data samples, privately trained models require only very small additional amounts of private information from the training dataset to achieve high diagnostic accuracy on the tasks at hand.
For the EPAG dataset, even though private models at α = 40 are not significantly inferior compared to non-private counterparts, the effect of the lower amount of training samples is observable at more restrictive privacy budgets. Especially at α < 1.06, the negative effect of private training on the discrimination of patients in certain age groups becomes noticeable. This underscores the requirement for larger training datasets, which the objective privacy guarantees of DP can enable through incentivizing data sharing.
Our analysis of the per-diagnosis performance of models that are trained with and without privacy guarantees shows that all models discriminate against diagnoses that are underrepresented in the training set in both private and non-private training. This finding is not unusual and several examples can be found in [42]. However, the drop in performance between private and non-private training is uncorrelated to the sample size. Instead, the difficulty of the diagnosis seems to drive the difference in AUROC between the two settings. Consequently, diagnostic performance under privacy constraints suffers the most for those classes, which already have the lowest AUROC in the non-private setting. Conversely, diagnoses that are predicted with the highest AUROC suffer the least when DP is introduced.
Previous works investigating the effect of DP on fairness show that privacy preservation amplifies discrimination
^13^
. This effect is limited to very low privacy budgets in our study. Our models remain fair despite at the levels of privacy protection typically used for training state-of-the-art models in current literature
^14^
, likely due to our real-life datasets' large size and/or high quality.
The effects we observed are not limited to within-domain models. Indeed, in a concurrent work, we investigated the effects of DP training on the domain generalizability of diagnostic medical AI models
^15^
. Our findings revealed that even under extreme privacy conditions, DP-trained models show comparable performance to non-DP models in external domains.
Our analysis of fairness related to patient age showed that older patients are discriminated against both in the non-private and private settings. On UKA-CKR, age-related discrimination remains approximately constant with stronger privacy guarantees. On the other hand, young patients enjoy overall lower model discrimination in the non-private and the private setting. Interestingly, young patients seem to profit more from stronger privacy guarantees, as they enjoy progressively more fairness privilege with increasing privacy protection level.

<!-- PAGE 10 -->

This holds despite the fact that patients under 30 represent the smallest fraction of the UKA-CXR dataset. The privilege of young patients is most likely due to a confounding variable, namely the lower complexity of imaging findings in younger patients due to their improved ability to cooperate during radiograph acquisition, resulting in better discrimination of the pathological finding on a more homogeneous background (i.e., “cleaner”) radiographs which are easier to diagnose overall
^11^
 (see Fig. 6). This hypothesis should be validated in cohorts with a larger proportion of young patients, and we intend to expand on this finding in future work. On the PDAC dataset, classification accuracy remains approximately on par between age subgroups except at very restrictive privacy budgets, where older patients begin to suffer discrimination, likely due to the aforementioned imbalance between control and tumor cases and the overall smaller dataset coupled with a lack of pre-training. The analysis of model fairness related to patient sex for UKA-CXR shows that female patients (which – similar to young patients – are an underrepresented group) enjoy a slightly higher diagnostic accuracy than male patients for almost all privacy levels and vice versa on the PDAC dataset. However, effect size differences were found to be small, so that this finding can also be explained by variability between models or by the randomness in the training process. Further investigation is thus required to elucidate the aforementioned effects.

**Fig. 6**
 | Illustrative radiographs from the UKA-CXR dataset. All examinations share the diagnosis of pneumonic infiltrates on the right patient side (–left image side). Diagnosis of older patients is often more challenging due to the more frequent presence of comorbidities and less cooperation during image acquisition which results in lower image quality (a) 76-year-old male patient, note the presence of a cardiac pacemaker that projects over part of the left lung. b 76-year-old male

Furthermore, there is no final conclusion for which fairness measure is preferable. In our study we focused on the statistical parity difference, however, there are other works proposing other measures. One, which recently received attention, is the underdiagnosis rate of subgroups
^12^
. We evaluated this for the PDAC dataset and found that in principle it shows the same trends as the statistical parity difference (see Supplementary Tables 9 and 10).

In conclusion, we analyzed the usage of privacy-preserving neural network training and its implications on utility and fairness for a relevant diagnostic task on a large real-world dataset. We showed that the utilization of specialized architectures and targeted model pre-training allows for high model accuracy despite stringent privacy guarantees. This enables us to train expert-level diagnostic AI models even with privacy budgets as low as 
\epsilon = 1
, which – to our knowledge – has not been shown before, and represents an important step towards the widespread utilization of differentially private models in radiological diagnosis. AI applications. Moreover, our findings that the introduction of differential privacy mechanisms to model training does – in most cases – not amplify unfair model bias regarding patient age, sex or comorbidity signifies that – at least in our use case – the resulting models abide by important non-discrimination principles of ethical AI. We are hopeful that our findings will encourage practitioners and clinicians to introduce advanced privacy-preserving techniques such as differential privacy when training diagnostic AI models.

<!-- PAGE 11 -->

https://github.com/10.1038/s42656-024-00462-6

**Data availability**

The UKA-CXR dataset is not publicly accessible, in adherence to the policies for patient privacy protection at the University Hospital RWTH Aachen in Germany. Similarly, the PDAC-CXR dataset will be publicly available due to patient privacy considerations, as it is an in-house dataset at Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Munich. German data access for both datasets can be granted upon reasonable request to the corresponding author. Source data presented in Figures are available as Supplementary Data 1.

**Code availability**

All experiments for UKA-CXR for training and evaluation of the deep neural networks, differential privacy, data augmentation, image analysis, and preprocessing are publicly available at 
[https://github.com/10.1038/s42656-024-00462-6](https://github.com/10.1038/s42656-024-00462-6)
. Code for the experiments was developed in Python 3.9 using the PyTorch 2.0 framework. The DPC code was developed using Ossama 14.07. Considering the utilization of equivalent computational resources, the time taken for the DP training to converge was approximately 3 times longer than the non-DP training time, which was required for the non-DP training with a similar network architecture. All code for the analyses on the PDAC-CXR dataset are available at 
[https://github.com/10.1038/s42656-024-00462-6](https://github.com/10.1038/s42656-024-00462-6)
. The code for both datasets are permanently archived on Zenodo and are accessible via “and”.

Received: 6 April 2023; Accepted: 16 February 2024; Published online: 14 March 2024

**References**

1. Uygur, D. et al. Adversarial inference and its mitigations in privacy-preserving collaborative machine learning.*Nat. Mach. Intell.*3, 749–758 (2021).
2. Konečný, J., McMahan, H. B., Ramage, D. & Richtárik, P. Federated optimization: Distributed machine learning for on-device intelligence.*CoRR arXiv:1610.02527*(2016).
3. Konečný, J. et al. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency.*arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.05492*(2016).
4. Mohring, B., Moore, E., Konečný, J., Dwork, C. & Acs, S. A. On Communication-Efficient learning of deep networks from non-identical data. In*Artificial Intelligence and Statistics*, 1273–1282 (PMLR, 2017).
5. Trufer, D. et al. Encrypted federated learning for secure decentralized collaboration in cancer image analysis.*Med. Image Anal.*82, 102196 (2023).[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medica.2023.102196](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medica.2023.102196).
6. Dwork, C., Roth, A. et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy.*Found. Trends Theor. Comput. Sci.*9, 211–407 (2014).
7. Bonenschl, F. et al. When the curious abandon honesty: Federated learning is not private. In*2022 IEEE 68th European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P)*, 175–198 (IEEE, 2023).
8. Frank, M., Czaja, A., Konečný, J. & Goldstein, T. Robbing the fool: Directly obtaining private data in federated learning with modified models. In*International Conference on Learning Representations*(2021).
9. Wang, K.-C. et al. Variational model inversion attacks.*Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.*34, 9706–9718 (2021).
10. Hahn, N., Vardi, G., Yehuda, O., Shamir, O. & Itani, M. Reconstructing training data from trained neural networks.*Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.*35, 2291–2304 (2022).
11. Carlini, N. et al. Extracting training data from diffusion models. In*32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)*(2023).
12. Wang, K.-C. & Aminipour, D. Artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML)-enabled medical devices.*Wileyopenaccess.com*(2023).[https://doi.org/10.1002/med.20462](https://doi.org/10.1002/med.20462).
13. Food and Drug Administration. Artificial intelligence and machine learning-enabled medical devices—software medical device—safety and effectiveness guidance.[https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/artificial-intelligence-and-machine-learning-enabled-medical-devices-software-medical-device-safety-and-effectiveness-guidance](https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/artificial-intelligence-and-machine-learning-enabled-medical-devices-software-medical-device-safety-and-effectiveness-guidance)(2023).
14. Wasseman, J. L. & Zhou, S. A statistical framework for differential privacy.*J. Am. Statist. Assoc.*106, 375–389 (2011).
15. Dong, J., Roth, A. S. W. u. al. Gaussian differential privacy.*J. Royal Stat. Soc. Ser. B Stat. Methodol.*85, 103–120 (2023).
16. Kaleli, G., Heys, J., Ziler, A. & Rueckert, D. Bounding data reconstruction attack risk in federated learning using a framework of differential privacy.*Theory and Practice of Differential Privacy Workshop*(2023).
17. Li, M. et al. Tight auditing of differentially private machine learning. In*23rd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security’23)*, 1621–1634 (2023).
18. Kaleli, G. et al. End-to-end privacy preserving deep learning on multi-institutional medical imaging.*Med. Image Anal.*4, 474–483 (2021).
19. Hayes, J., Maiti, S., & Bala, P. Bounding training data reconstruction in dp-sqat.*arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07225*(2023).
20. Bala, P., Chendel, G. & Hayes, J. Reconstructing training data with informed adversaries. In*2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy*(2022).
21. Cohen, A. & Nisim, K. Towards formalizing the “gdp’s notion of singling out.*Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.*117, 8344–8352 (2020).
22. Cohen, A. Attacks on differential privacy. In*USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security’22)*, 1269–1286 (2022).
23. Kash, I. M. et al. Data reconstruction attacks in differentially private learning. In*Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security*, 308–319 (2016).
24. Hatamizadeh, A. et al. Divergent reconstruction attacks make federated learning unsafe?*IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging*(2023).
25. Dwork, C. A firm foundation for private data analysis.*Commun. ACM*54, 86–95 (2011).
26. De, S., Berrada, L., Heys, J., Smith, S. & L. Bala, P. Unlocking high-accuracy differentially private image classification through scale-arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13950 (2020).
27. Kurakin, A. et al. Adversarial learning at large scale with differential privacy.*arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12323*(2022).
28. Tran, C., Fonette, F., Van Henckens, P., & Yee, Z. Decision making with differential privacy: a taxonomy on Security and Privacy.*IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur.*16, 560–566 (2021).
29. Gurumurthy, D., Gupta, V., Kompella, D. & Morgenstern, J. On the compatibility of privacy and fairness. In*Adjunct Publication of the 27th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization*, 309–315 (2018).
30. Pachkina, K. et al. Deep learning-based patient re-identification in radiology.*IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informatics*26, 14851 (2022).
31. Narayanan, A. & Shmatikov, V. Robust de-identification of large scale datasets. In*2008 IEEE 25th International Conference on Data Engineering*, 111–126 (IEEE, 2008).
32. Li, W. et al. Privacy-preserving federated brain tumour segmentation. In*Machine Learning in Medical Imaging: 10th International Workshop, MLMI 2019*, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2019, Shenzhen, China, October 18–19, 2019.*Proceedings*10, 135–141 (Springer, 2019).
33. Ziegler, J., Pfirrmann, B., Schulz, H., Staschak, A. & Americh, B. Differential privacy for classification of heterogeneous chest x-ray data.*Sanjour*22, 5116 (2023).
34. Li, W. et al. Privacy-preserving federated learning for differentially private impact of data imbalance on utility and fairness in differential privacy. In*Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Machine Learning in Practice*, 15–19 (2020).
35. Bapstyan, E., Pourasadi, O. & Shmatikov, V. Differential privacy for disparate impact in medical imaging. In*Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Machine Learning in Practice*, 15–19 (2020).
36. [https://github.com/10.1038/s42656-024-00462-6](https://github.com/10.1038/s42656-024-00462-6)(2024).[https://doi.org/10.1038/s42656-024-00462-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42656-024-00462-6).

<!-- PAGE 12 -->

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-06462-6

**Article**

3. Khader, J. et al. Artificial intelligence for clinical interpretation of bedside chest radiographs. 
*Radiology*
 
**307**
, e220510 (2022).

4. Tayebi Arasteh, S. et al. Collaborative training of medical artificial intelligence models with unlabelled data. 
*Sci. Rep.*
 
**13**
, 6040 (2023).

5. Johnson, A. E. et al. Mimic-cxr, a de-identified publicly available database of chest radiographs with free-text reports. 
*Sci. Data*
 
**3**
, 317 (2016).

6. Ziller, A., Ziller, A., Rueckert, D., Hammernik, K. & Kalais, G. Differentially private training of residual networks with scale normalized cross-entropy. 
*Theory and Practice of Privacy Workshop, ICMR*
 (2022).

7. Yang, J. et al. Reinventing 2d convolutions for 3d images. 
*IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform.*
 
**25**
, 3009–3018 (2021).

8. Ho, X., Zhang, X., Ren, S. & Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In 
*Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition*
, 770–778 (2016).

9. Lufkin, S. & Shapiro, C. Balancing privacy and accelerating deep neural networks by reducing internal covariate shift. In 
*International Conference on Machine Learning*
, 448–456 (print, 2019).

10. Wu, Y. & Hu, X. Group-normalized convolution for the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 1–9 (2018).

11. Jahnke, T. et al. Mimic-cxr-pg: chest radiographs with structured labels. 
*PhysiNet*
 (2019).

12. Fukushima, K. Cognition: A self-organizing multilayered neural network. 
*IEEE Trans. Syst. Man. Cybern.*
 
**2**
, 127–137 (1972).

13. Nair, V. & Hinton, G. E. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines. 
*Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)*
, 1087–814 (2010).

14. Dozat, T. Incorporating nesterov momentum into adam. In 
*International Conference on Learning Representations, Workshop Track*
 (2016).

15. Mirza, D. M. et al. Self regularized non-monotonic activation function. In 
*The 31st British Machine Intelligence Conference*
 (2020).

16. Konstelitz, F. & Fauly, M. Bootstrapping and permuting paired t-tests for statistics. 
*Stat. Comput.*
 
**24**
, 263–266 (2014).

17. Unal, I. Defining an optimal cut-point value in an analysis: an alternative approach. 
*Comput. Methods Programs Biomed.*
 
**2017**
 (2017).

18. Calders, T. & Verwer, S. Three naive bayes approaches for discrimination-free classification. 
*Data Mining Knowl. Discov.*
 
**21**
, 277–292 (2010).

19. Mehrabi, N., Morostavi, F., Saxena, L., Nerman, K. & Galstyan, A. A survey on fairness in machine learning. 
*ACM Comput. Surv.*
 (CSUR) 
**54**
, 1–35 (2021).

20. Tayebi Arasteh, S. et al. Securing collaborative medical AI by using differential privacy: Domain transfer, re-identification of chest radiographs. 
*Radio. Artif. Intell.*
 
**6**
, e220122 (2024).

21. Wu, Y. T. et al. Comparison of deep learning interpretations by artificial intelligence algorithms in radiology residents. 
*JAMA Netw. Open*
 
**3**
, e2027779–e2027779 (2020).

22. Snyder, K., Kauranen, L., Zhang, H., McDermott, M. B., Chen, Y. & Chassman, M. Underdiscovery bias of artificial intelligence algorithms applied to chest radiographs in under-served patient populations. 
*Nat. Med.*
 
**27**
, 2175–2182 (2021).

23. Yousefpour, A. et al. Opacus: User-friendly differential privacy library in pytorch (2021). 
[https://github.com/pytorch/opacus](https://github.com/pytorch/opacus)
 (2021).

24. Arasteh, S. T. 
*DP CXR*
. 
[https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10301123](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10301123)
 (2023).

25. Ziller, A. 
*2.5d attention*
. 
[https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10301123](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10301123)
 (2023).

Research (BMBF) grant number 01KI02001. AZ and GK were supported by the German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under Grant Number 01ZZ2206C (PrIMA-MAT). DT is supported from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) (GRK 2007-1) as well as by the German Federal Ministry of Education (TRANSFORM/LVER, 0131212A, SWAG, and the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (CODEIA Open Consortium for Decentralized Medical Artificial Intelligence), 10105701; RS was supported by Deutsches Konsortium für KI in der Medizin (DKM) (DKM), GRK 2007-1) as well as by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research and the Bavarian State Ministry for Science and the Arts through the Munich Centre for Machine Learning. DR was supported by ERC Grant DeepMML (no. 884622). The funders played no role in the design or execution of the study. The authors of this work take full responsibility for it. For competing interests, see the Author contributions.

The formal analysis was conducted by S.T.A., A.Z., D.T. and G.K. The original draft was written by S.T.A. and A.Z. and edited by D.T. and G.K. The experiments as well as the software development for UCKR-GAN were performed by S.T.A. and Y.R. and P.D.Y. Statistical analyses were performed by A.Z. and S.T.A. D.T. and G.K. and the technical support was provided by S.T.A., A.Z., C.K., M.M., S.N., R.B., D.R., D.T. and G.K. read the manuscript and agreed to the submission of this paper.

**Funding**

Open access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.

**Competing interests**

The authors declare no competing interests.

**Additional information**

**Supplementary information**
 The online version contains supplementary material available at 
[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-06462-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-06462-6)
.

**Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Soroosh Tayebi Arasteh, Alexander Ziller, Daniel Truhn or Georgios Kassiris.**

**Peer review information**
 Communications Medicine thanks Valeriu Codreanu, Holger Roth and the other, anonymous, reviewers for their contribution to the peer review process. A peer review file is available.

**Reprints and permissions information**
 is available at 
[http://www.nature.com/reprints](http://www.nature.com/reprints)
.

**Publisher’s note**
 Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

**Open Access**
 This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit 
[http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
.

**Acknowledgements**

STA is funded partially supported by the Radiological Cooperative Network (RACON) under the German Federal Ministry of Education and

© The Author(s) 2024

Communications Medicine (2024) 44:6

12