

<!-- PAGE 1 -->

# nature biomedical engineering

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01056-8

# Algorithmic fairness in artificial intelligence for medicine and healthcare

Received: 1 October 2021

Accepted: 13 April 2023

Published online: 26 June 2023

Richard J. Chen
^1,2,3,4^
, Judy J. Wang
^1,2^
, Dr. Drew F. K. Williamson
^1,2^
, Tiffany Y. Chen
^1,2^
, Jana Lipkowitz
^1,2,3,4^
, Ming Y. Lu
^1,2,3,4^
, Sharifa Sahai
^1,2,3,4^
 & Faisal Mahmood
^1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12^

Check for updates

In healthcare, the development and deployment of insufficiently fair systems of artificial intelligence (AI) can undermine the delivery of equitable care. Assessing AI models stratified across subpopulations have revealed inequalities in how patients are diagnosed, treated and billed. In this Perspective, we outline fairness in machine learning through the lens of healthcare, and discuss how algorithmic biases (in data acquisition, genetic variation and intra-observer labelling variability, in particular) arise in clinical workflows and the resulting healthcare disparities. We also review emerging technology for mitigating biases via disentanglement, federated learning and model explainability, and their role in the development of AI-based software as a medical device.

next decade by replacing or assisting human interpretation for disease diagnosis and prognosis, and for the prediction of treatment responses. However, if left unchecked, algorithms may amplify existing healthcare inequalities that have been observed across different subpopulations
^1–10^
.

In this perspective, we discuss current challenges in the development of fair AI for medicine and healthcare, through diverse viewpoints spanning medicine, machine learning and their intersection in guiding public policy on the development and deployment of AI (SaMD). Discussions of AI exacerbated healthcare disparities have primarily debated the usage of race-specific covariates in risk calculators and have overlooked broader and systemic inequalities that are often implicitly encoded in the processes generating medical data. These inequalities are not easily mitigated by ignoring race
^11–13^
. And vice versa, conventional bias-mitigation strategies in AI may fail to translate to real-world clinical settings, because protected health information may include sensitive attributes, such as race and gender, and because data-generating processes across healthcare systems are heterogeneous and often capture different patient demographics, causing data mismatches in model development and deployment
^14^
.

With the proliferation of algorithms in healthcare, there are growing ethical concerns regarding the disparate impact that the models may have on under-represented communities
^15^
. Audit studies have shown that AI algorithms may discover spurious causal structures in the data that correlate with protected-identity status. These correlations imply that some AI algorithms may use protected identity statuses as a shortcut to predict health outcomes
^16,17^
. For instance, in pathology images, the intensity of haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains can predict ethnicity on the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), owing to hospital-specific image acquisition protocols
^18^
. On radiology images, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) may underdiagnose and misdiagnose under-served groups (in particular, Hispanic patients and patients on Medicaid in the United States) at a disproportionate rate compared with White patients, and capture implicit information about patient race
^19,20^
. Despite the large disparities in performance, there is a lack of regulation on how to train and evaluate AI models on diverse and protected subgroups. With an increasing number of algorithms receiving approval from the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as AI-based software as a medical device (AI-SaMD), AI is poised to penetrate routine clinical care over the

next decade by replacing or assisting human interpretation for disease diagnosis and prognosis, and for the prediction of treatment responses. However, if left unchecked, algorithms may amplify existing healthcare inequalities that have been observed across different subpopulations
^1–10^
.

In this perspective, we discuss current challenges in the development of fair AI for medicine and healthcare, through diverse viewpoints spanning medicine, machine learning and their intersection in guiding public policy on the development and deployment of AI (SaMD). Discussions of AI exacerbated healthcare disparities have primarily debated the usage of race-specific covariates in risk calculators and have overlooked broader and systemic inequalities that are often implicitly encoded in the processes generating medical data. These inequalities are not easily mitigated by ignoring race
^11–13^
. And vice versa, conventional bias-mitigation strategies in AI may fail to translate to real-world clinical settings, because protected health information may include sensitive attributes, such as race and gender, and because data-generating processes across healthcare systems are heterogeneous and often capture different patient demographics, causing data mismatches in model development and deployment
^14^
.

Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
^2^
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
^3^
Cancer Program, Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
^4^
Cancer Data Science Program, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. 
^5^
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. 
^6^
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
^7^
Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
^8^
Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
^9^
Harvard Data Science Initiative, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
^10^
e-mail: FaisalMahmood@bwh.harvard.edu

next decade by replacing or assisting human interpretation for disease diagnosis and prognosis, and for the prediction of treatment responses. However, if left unchecked, algorithms may amplify existing healthcare inequalities that have been observed across different subpopulations
^1–10^
.

In this perspective, we discuss current challenges in the development of fair AI for medicine and healthcare, through diverse viewpoints spanning medicine, machine learning and their intersection in guiding public policy on the development and deployment of AI (SaMD). Discussions of AI exacerbated healthcare disparities have primarily debated the usage of race-specific covariates in risk calculators and have overlooked broader and systemic inequalities that are often implicitly encoded in the processes generating medical data. These inequalities are not easily mitigated by ignoring race
^11–13^
. And vice versa, conventional bias-mitigation strategies in AI may fail to translate to real-world clinical settings, because protected health information may include sensitive attributes, such as race and gender, and because data-generating processes across healthcare systems are heterogeneous and often capture different patient demographics, causing data mismatches in model development and deployment
^14^
.

Nature Biomedical Engineering | Volume 7 | June 2023 | 719–742

719

<!-- PAGE 2 -->

**Perspective**

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01056-8

**Fig. 1**
 Connecting healthcare disparities and dataset shifts to algorithmic fairness. a. Population shift as a result of genetic variation and population-specific phenotypes across subpopulations. Current AI algorithms for the diagnosis of skin cancer using demographic and macroscopic photographs may be developed on datasets that under-represent darker skin types, which may exacerbate the health disparities of some geographic regions
^10–11,16^
. b. Developing algorithms using datasets that over-represent individuals with European ancestry, the prevalence of certain mutations may also differ in the training and test distributions. This is the case for disparities in CT/MR translation frequencies across European and Asian populations
^14,17^
. c. Population shifts and prevalence shifts resulting from disparities in social determinants of health. Differences in healthcare access may result in delayed referrals, and cause later-stage disease diagnoses and worsened mortality rates
^18,19^
. d. Concept shift as a result of the ongoing refinement of medical classification systems, such as the re-categorization of stroke, which was previously defined under diseases of the circulatory system in ICD-10 and is now defined under neurological disorders in ICD-11 (refs. 117,210). Another taxonomies, such as the

BaFF criteria for borderline cases of T cell-mediated rejection (TCMR), J10.11.10 score biopsies would be classified as “normal”
^14^
. e. Acquisition shift as a result of differing data-curation protocols (associated with the use of different MRI or CT scanners, radiation dosages, sample preparation protocols or image-acquisition parameters) may induce batch-effects in the data
^14,15^
. f. Novel or insufficiently understood occurrences, such as interactions between the SARS-CoV-2 virus and lung cancer, may have unknown modes of dataset shift
^16^
. g. Global health challenges in the deployment of AI SARS-CoV-2 tests and in low- and middle-income countries can lead to resource constraints for AI SARS-CoV-2 tests, such as limitations in graphics processing unit resources and in lack of distribution of medical records and other health data, as well as to dataset shift barriers such as differing demographics, disease prevalence, classification systems and data-curation protocols. Group fairness criteria may also be difficult to satisfy when AI SARS-CoV-2 test deployment faces constraints in the access of protected health information.

We begin by providing a succinct overview of healthcare disparities, fair machine learning and fairness criteria. We then outline current inequities in healthcare systems and their varied data-generating processes (such as the absence of genetic diversity in biomedical datasets and differing image-acquisition standards across hospitals), and their connections to fundamental machine-learning problems (in particular, dataset shift, representation learning and robustness; Fig. 1). By understanding how inequities can drive disparities in the performance of AI algorithms, we highlight federated learning, representation learning and explainability as emerging research areas for the mitigation of bias

and for improving the evaluation of fairness in the deployment lifecycle for AI SARS-CoV-2 tests. We provide a glossary of terms in Box 1.

## Fairness and machine learning

### Understanding health disparities and inequities

Healthcare disparities can lead to differences in healthcare quality, access to healthcare and health outcomes across patient subgroups. These disparities are deeply shaped by both historical and current socioeconomic inequities
^22–23^
. Although they are often viewed as observable group-level characteristics—such as race, gender, age

Nature Biomedical Engineering | Volume 7 | June 2023 | 719–742

720

<!-- PAGE 3 -->

**BOX 1**

## Glossary of terms

**Health disparities.**
 Group-level inequalities as a result of socioeconomic factors and social determinants of health, such as education status, education level, income, race/ethnicity, language, age, gender, sexual identity or orientation and body mass index.

**Protected or sensitive attributes.**
 Patient-level metadata that medical algorithms should ideally protect against.

**Protected subgroup.**
 Patients belonging to the same category in a protected attribute.

**Disparate treatment.**
 Intentional discrimination against protected subgroups. Disparate treatment can result from machine-learning algorithms that include sensitive-attribute information as direct input or that have confounding features that explain the protected attribute.

**Disparate impact.**
 Unintentional discrimination as a result of algorithmic impact on protected subgroups.

**Algorithm fairness.**
 A concept for defining, quantifying and mitigating unfairness from machine-learning workflows that may cause disproportionate harm to individuals or groups of individuals. Fairness is a formalization of the minimization of disparate treatment and impact. There are multiple criteria for the quantification of fairness, yet they typically involve the evaluation of differences in performance metrics (such as accuracy, true-positive rate, false-positive rate (FPR) and risk measures, larger differences would

indicate larger disparate impact across protected subgroups, as defined in Box 2.

**AI-SaMD.**
 A categorization of medical devices undergoing regulation by the FDA.

**Model auditing.**
 Post-hoc quantitative evaluation for the assessment of violations of fairness criteria. This is often coupled with explainability techniques for attributing specific features to algorithmic decisions.

**Dataset shift.**
 A mismatch between the distribution of data in the source and target datasets (or in the training and test datasets).

**Domain adaptation.**
 Correction of dataset shifts in the source and target datasets. Typically, domain-adaptation methods match the input spaces of the datasets (via importance weighting or related techniques) or of feature spaces (via adversarial feature matching).

**Federated learning.**
 A form of privacy-preserving distributed learning that trains neural networks on local clients and sends updated weight parameters to a centralized server without sharing the data.

**Fair-representation learning.**
 Learning intermediate feature representations that are invariant to protected attributes.

**Disentanglement.**
 A property of intermediate feature representations that decouples neural networks, in which individual features control independent sources of variation in the data.

and ethnicity—the sources of these disparities encompass a wider range of observed and latent risk factors, including body mass index, education, insurance type, geography and genetics. As formalized by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, most of these factors are defined within the five domains of social determinants of health: economic stability, education access and quality, healthcare access and quality, neighbourhood and built environment, and social and community context. These factors are commonly attributed to disparate health outcomes and disparities in the healthcare system
^10–12^
. For instance, in the early 2000s, reports by the United States Surgeon General documented the disparities in tobacco use and in access to mental healthcare as experienced by different racial and ethnic groups
^13^
. In the epidemiology of maternal mortality in the United States, fatality rates for Black women are substantially higher than for White women, owing to economic instability, the lack of providers accepting public insurance and poor healthcare access (as exemplified by counties that do not offer obstetric care, also known as maternal care deserts)
^14–16^
.

Understanding the sources of these disparities would guide decision-making policies on improving healthcare for underserved patients. However, these policies are often developed using incomplete, noisy and prejudiced data-generating processes. This confounds the underlying cause, and hence may mitigate clinical practitioners' ability to make spurious associations between race and disease outcomes
^17^
. For instance, one of the equations for calculating estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), a clinical biomarker for chronic kidney disease (CKD)—includes race as a covariate to adjust for potential biological differences in creatinine generation across self-reported race subgroups. This has resulted in the overestimation of kidney function and in the underdiagnosis of CKD, thereby reducing patient access to specialist referrals, appropriate medications and transplantation evaluations
^18–20,21^
. Another example relates to the development of Bone-Feature risk-assessment calculators. In this context, specific corrections are used to account for the varying incidence trends of osteoporosis among different populations (for example, risk is adjusted lower for Black women owing to the reported lower incidence of osteoporosis in this group), which may also cause interventions for osteoporosis
^22,23^
. Regardless of the true causal factors of these health disparities, which remain under investigation, algorithms developed using data with confounding historical biases may cause disproportionate harm. The evaluation and mitigation of biases caused by algorithms may therefore become the norm for the study of fairness in machine learning.

### Definition of fairness

The axiomatization of fairness is a collective societal problem that has existed beyond the evaluation of healthcare disparities. In legal history, fairness was a central problem in the development of non-discrimination laws (for example, titles VI and VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964), which prohibit discrimination based on legally protected classes, such as race, colour, sex and national origin) in federal programs and employment. In the United States, the Fair Housing Act of 1968, the Supreme Court of the United States prohibited the use of race (and other implicit variables in hiring decisions, even if discrimination was not intended
^24^
). Naturally, fairness spans many human endeavours, such as diversity hiring in recruitment, the distribution of

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-023-01605-6

Nature Biomedical Engineering | Volume 7 | June 2023 | 79–742

73

<!-- PAGE 4 -->

There are three commonly used fairness criteria for binary classification tasks, which we describe here by adapting notation from [10, 11].

We denote 
X, Y, A
 as the data distribution for samples 
X \in \mathbb{R}^d
 labeled with 
Y \in \{0, 1\}
 and protected subgroup membership 
A \in \{0, 1\}
. We denote 
\mathcal{X}
 as the model parameterized by 
\theta
 that produces scores 
\hat{y} \in \mathbb{R}
 and use the threshold 
\tau
 to derive a classifier 
\hat{Y} = f_{\theta}(\hat{y})
 where 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
, 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 0
 otherwise. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y} \ge \tau
 if the classifier with a thresholded policy that classifies patients for the waitlist. 
\mathcal{X}
 is a set of the sigmoid function, can be used to transform the score 
\hat{y}
 from 
\mathbb{R}
 to 
\{0, 1\}
, such that it can be interpreted as a probability score, for example 
P(Y = 1|X = x)
. For regression tasks, it often suffices to leave 
\hat{y}
 as the identity map. Here, we drop 
\theta
, as it is implicitly specified by the task of interest.

For the problem of placing patients on the kidney transplant waitlist, we want 
\hat{y}
 to represent patient covariates (such as age, body size, serum creatinine and serum cystatin C), to denote self-reported race categories, 
(A, \hat{y})
 to denote a model that produces a probability risk score 
\hat{y}
 for needing a transplant, and 
f_{\theta}(\hat{y}) = 1
 if 
\hat{y}

<!-- PAGE 5 -->

## Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01056-8

can be insufficient to satisfy guarantees of non-discrimination and fairness. This is because there can be other input features that are unknown confounders that correlate with membership to a protected group
^10^
. A canonical counterexample to fairness through awareness
^11^
 is the 1998 COMPAS algorithm, a risk tool that excluded defendants from pre-trial diversion programs
^12^
. The algorithm was contended to be fair in the mitigation of disparate treatment
^13^
. However, despite not using race as a covariate, a retrospective study found that COMPAS assigned higher risk scores to black defendants twice as often than to White defendants (45% versus 23%, respectively). This example illustrates that fairness guarantees can be in conflict with one another, and has since motivated the ongoing development of formal definitions of evaluation criteria for fairness that are used to supervise algorithms
^14,15^
 (see Fig. 2). For example, for the risk of re-offense, fairness via predictive parity was defined for White and Black defendants, whereas fairness via equalized odds was violated, owing to unequal FPRs. And, for the eGFR based prediction of CKD, removing race can correct the overestimation of kidney function and lower the false negative rate (FNR), yet may lead to the underestimation of kidney function and to an increase in the false positive rate (FPR), which violates the fairness criteria for different disparate impact. Different practical applications may thus be better served by different fairness criteria.

## Techniques for the mitigation of unfairness

To mitigate the effects of group-based unfairness, algorithm developers can be used to adapt existing algorithms with pre-processing steps that blind the input or reweight the input space to satisfy group fairness
^16,17^
, with the processing of the input that construct additional optimization constraints or with regularization-loss terms that penalize non-fairness
^18,19^
—and with post-processing steps that apply corrections to collate model predictions across subgroups
^20,21^
.

### Pre-processing

Algorithmic biases in healthcare are often seen from historical inequities and structural associations linking protected class identity to disease outcome in the dataset, in particular when the underlying causal factors are unknown. For factors that are not determinants of health, training algorithms on health data that have internalized such biases, the distribution of outcomes across ethnicities may be skewed, for example, for observed disparities in health outcomes have more frequent referrals, which may result in more high-grade and invasive phenotypes for Black patients diagnosed with prostate cancer
^22^
 (labeling problems known as “negative legacy” or as sample-selection bias
^23^
). To mitigate this form of bias, data pre-processing techniques such as importance weighting
^24^
 (Fig. 2) can be used to reweight training data to reflect infrequent samples belonging to protected subgroups
^25,26^
. Similarly, training data is corrected to be representative by using more frequent subsamples of the original training dataset and can be intuitively applied to correct for the under-representation of subgroups
^27^
. For example, structural biases, like under-representation and under-sampling can also be used to directly eliminate proxy variables that encode protected class features. However, this approach can be subject to variance and sensitivity under dataset shift, may be sensitive to outliers and data paucity in subgroups, and may overlook joint relationships between protected classes
^28^
.

### In-processing

Biased data-curation protocols may induce correlations between protected attributes and other features, which may be implicitly captured by model design decisions, such as feature selection, medical codes (such as radiographs, pathology slides and fundus photographs) can lead to algorithmic biases, which may be difficult to correct without pre-processing
^29,30^
. To mitigate the effect of confounding variables, in-processing techniques adopt a non-discrimination term within the model to penalize learned covariate-discriminative risks and can be modified to include non-discrimination terms for computing the covariance of the input and output variables
^31^
. In-processing techniques can also be used to the decision boundary, or by modifying the decision boundary to be orthogonal to the subspace spanned by the protected features (misestimation), subject to accuracy constraints
^32^
. For deep-learning models, such as CNNs, adversarial-loss terms (inspired by the minimax game of generative adversarial networks, GANs) can be used to the internal feature representations invariant to protected subgroups
^33^
. In addition, adversarial learning techniques can be used to mitigate the weight fairness constraints in online learning frameworks
^34^
. A limitation of in-processing approaches is that the learning objective is made more complex when including these additional non-discriminatory terms. Moreover, metrics such as the FPR and the FNR can be sensitive to the shape of risk distributions and to label prevalence
^35^
, which may result in reduced overall performance
^36,37^
.

### Post-processing

Post-processing refers to techniques that modify the output of a trained model (such as a prediction) to satisfy fairness constraints for protected-group fairness metrics. To achieve equalized odds, one can simply pick thresholds for each group such that the model achieves the same false positive rate across all groups
^38^
. However, when applying such correcting curves does not intersect, or when the desired operating point is not within the convex hull of the operating points, one can systematically worsen the performance for select subgroups using a randomized decision rule
^39^
. This implies that the performance on select groups may need to be artificially reduced to satisfy equalized odds. Hence, the difficulty of the task could vary between different groups
^40^
, which may result in a reduction in the performance of other rule-based systems that assess risk using discrete scores for groups, by defining high-discriminatory risks on specific predisposition higher than 130 mmHg (ref. 97), probability thresholds for each risk category can be selected to satisfy predictive parity. In this case, the proportion of positive predictions for each group may need to be adjusted across subgroups (known as calibration; Box 2). To calibrate continuous predictions, one can use calibration methods, a logic transform can be applied to the predicted probabilities and then a calibration curve can be fitted for each group. This ensures that the risk scores have the same predictive power across groups
^41^
. In addition, a method has been found for the COMPAS algorithm, satisfying both predictive parity and equalized odds may be impossible
^42^
.

### Targeted data collection

Targeted data collection, which increases the size of the dataset by collecting under-represented subgroups can be an effective stopgap
^43^
. However, targeted data collection may require surveillance, and hence may be expensive and time-consuming. Also, there are practical limits in the collection of protected health information, as well as stringent data interoperability standards
^44^
.

### Healthcare disparities arising from dataset shift

Many domain-specific challenges in healthcare include the adoption of bias-mitigation techniques for reducing harm from AI algorithms. In particular, the adoption of these techniques to reduce healthcare disparities has shown that optimizing fairness can result in worse model performance or in suboptimal calibration of risk subgroups. This is because fairness and accuracy can be in trade-off
^45,46^
. Benchmark such as mFEDAR, which evaluated H20 models for fairness and accuracy, has shown that fairness found that current state-of-the-art methods do not outperform fairness-through-awareness
^47^
 with statistical significance. Also, fairness

<!-- PAGE 6 -->

**Fig. 2**
 Strategies for mitigating disparate impact. a. For under-represented samples in the training and test datasets, importance weighting can be applied to overweight the infrequent samples so that their distribution matches in the two datasets. The schematic shows that, before importance reweighting, a model that overfits to samples with a low volume tumour in the training distribution (blue) underfits a test distribution that has more cases with large tumour volumes. For the model to better fit the test distribution, importance reweighting can be used to increase the importance of the cases with large tumour volumes (denoted by larger image sizes). b. To remove protected attributes in the representation space

techniques often make strong assumptions about the learning scenario, such as the training and test data being independently and identically distributed, an assumption which is often violated when using data from hospitals in different geographies or when employing different data-curation protocols
^38,39,40^
. Another assumption is the availability of clean and protected attributes at test time, which is a re-occurring challenge for the development of fairness methods when working in healthcare applications that limit access to protected health information
^38,41^
. Moreover, because genetic ancestry is causally associated with many genetic traits and diseases, there are many clinical problems for which including protected attributes such as ancestry (rather than self-reported race, which is a social construct shaped by historical inequities) may promote fairness.

Many healthcare disparities in medical AI can be understood as arising from fundamental machine-learning challenges, such as dataset shift. Dataset shift can arise from differences in population demographics, genetic ancestry, image-acquisition techniques, disease prevalence and social determinants of health among other factors, and can cause disparate performance at test time
^10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,68,69,70,71,72,73,74,75,76,77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99,100,101,102,103,104,105,106,107,108,109,110,111,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124,125,126,127,128,129,130,131,132,133,134,135,136,137,138,139,140,141,142,143,144,145,146,147,148,149,150,151,152,153,154,155,156,157,158,159,160,161,162,163,164,165,166,167,168,169,170,171,172,173,174,175,176,177,178,179,180,181,182,183,184,185,186,187,188,189,190,191,192,193,194,195,196,197,198,199,200,201,202,203,204,205,206,207,208,209,210,211,212,213,214,215,216,217,218,219,220,221,222,223,224,225,226,227,228,229,230,231,232,233,234,235,236,237,238,239,240,241,242,243,244,245,246,247,248,249,250,251,252,253,254,255,256,257,258,259,260,261,262,263,264,265,266,267,268,269,270,271,272,273,274,275,276,277,278,279,280,281,282,283,284,285,286,287,288,289,290,291,292,293,294,295,296,297,298,299,300,301,302,303,304,305,306,307,308,309,310,311,312,313,314,315,316,317,318,319,320,321,322,323,324,325,326,327,328,329,330,331,332,333,334,335,336,337,338,339,340,341,342,343,344,345,346,347,348,349,350,351,352,353,354,355,356,357,358,359,360,361,362,363,364,365,366,367,368,369,370,371,372,373,374,375,376,377,378,379,380,381,382,383,384,385,386,387,388,389,390,391,392,393,394,395,396,397,398,399,400,401,402,403,404,405,406,407,408,409,410,411,412,413,414,415,416,417,418,419,420,421,422,423,424,425,426,427,428,429,430,431,432,433,434,435,436,437,438,439,440,441,442,443,444,445,446,447,448,449,450,451,452,453,454,455,456,457,458,459,460,461,462,463,464,465,466,467,468,469,470,471,472,473,474,475,476,477,478,479,480,481,482,483,484,485,486,487,488,489,490,491,492,493,494,495,496,497,498,499,500,501,502,503,504,505,506,507,508,509,510,511,512,513,514,515,516,517,518,519,520,521,522,523,524,525,526,527,528,529,530,531,532,533,534,535,536,537,538,539,540,541,542,543,544,545,546,547,548,549,550,551,552,553,554,555,556,557,558,559,560,561,562,563,564,565,566,567,568,569,570,571,572,573,574,575,576,577,578,579,580,581,582,583,584,585,586,587,588,589,590,591,592,593,594,595,596,597,598,599,600,601,602,603,604,605,606,607,608,609,610,611,612,613,614,615,616,617,618,619,620,621,622,623,624,625,626,627,628,629,630,631,632,633,634,635,636,637,638,639,640,641,642,643,644,645,646,647,648,649,650,651,652,653,654,655,656,657,658,659,660,661,662,663,664,665,666,667,668,669,670,671,672,673,674,675,676,677,678,679,680,681,682,683,684,685,686,687,688,689,690,691,692,693,694,695,696,697,698,699,700,701,702,703,704,705,706,707,708,709,710,711,712,713,714,715,716,717,718,719,720,721,722,723,724,725,726,727,728,729,730,731,732,733,734,735,736,737,738,739,740,741,742,743,744,745,746,747,748,749,750,751,752,753,754,755,756,757,758,759,760,761,762,763,764,765,766,767,768,769,770,771,772,773,774,775,776,777,778,779,780,781,782,783,784,785,786,787,788,789,790,791,792,793,794,795,796,797,798,799,800,801,802,803,804,805,806,807,808,809,810,811,812,813,814,815,816,817,818,819,820,821,822,823,824,825,826,827,828,829,830,831,832,833,834,835,836,837,838,839,840,841,842,843,844,845,846,847,848,849,850,851,852,853,854,855,856,857,858,859,860,861,862,863,864,865,866,867,868,869,870,871,872,873,874,875,876,877,878,879,880,881,882,883,884,885,886,887,888,889,890,891,892,893,894,895,896,897,898,899,900,901,902,903,904,905,906,907,908,909,910,911,912,913,914,915,916,917,918,919,920,921,922,923,924,925,926,927,928,929,930,931,932,933,934,935,936,937,938,939,940,941,942,943,944,945,946,947,948,949,950,951,952,953,954,955,956,957,958^

<!-- PAGE 7 -->

**Perspective**
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01056-8
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
**TCGA-LIACL cohort (North America)**
**PONER cohort (Asia)**
**Proportion of EGFR mutation in Asian populations**
</p

<!-- PAGE 8 -->

**PathPersive**
[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01056-8](#)
**Fig. 4**
 Dataset shifts in the deployment of AI-SolMDx for clinical-grade AI algorithms. a. Example of one specific H&E stain variability under different whole-slide scanners, resulting in variable histologic tissue appearance. b. Example of variations in ICT scans acquired at two different hospitals.
**a**
Hamamatsu E210 Apertix GT 450 3DHistech 750
**b**
Hospital site 1 Hospital site 2
The histograms show the radio intensity in normal liver tissue and in liver lesions. Owing to differences in the acquisition protocols, there might be significant overlap between the CT values for normal liver tissue from one hospital and for liver lesions from another hospital. HU, Hounsfield units.
common genomic alterations may be undetectable, despite being extensively used to discover molecular subtypes and despite having helped to redefine World Health Organization (WHO) taxonomies for cancer classification
^100–102^
.
Therefore, studies that control for social determinants of health may nevertheless be affected by population shift from genetic variation, and hence may manifest population-specific phenotypes. For instance, many cancer types have well-known disparities explained by biological determinants in which, even after controlling for socioeconomic status and access to healthcare, there exist population-specific genetic variants and gene-expression profiles that contribute substantially towards disparities in clinical outcomes and treatment responses
^103–105^
. Glioblastomas, for instance, demonstrate sex differences in clinical features (in the left temporal lobe for males and in the right temporal lobe for females), in genetic features (the association of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) inactivation with tumour growth and in whether variations in the isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) sequence are a prognostic marker) and in outcomes (worse survival and treatment responses in men)
^106,107^
. In aggressive cancer types such as triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), there is mounting evidence that ancestry-specific innate immune variants contribute to the higher incidence of TNBC and mortality in people of African ancestry
^108,109^
. In prostate cancer, diagnostic gene panels (such as Oncotopred, developed with patients of predominantly European ancestry) predict poorer prognosis (higher risk) in people of European descent than African Americans; this introduces the notion of population-specific gene signatures that could shed light on a complex aetiology
^110^
. In ophthalmology, there are known ethnographic variations across ethnicities, such as melanin concentration within uveal melanocytes (a higher concentration leads to darker fundus pigmentation), retinal vessel appearance as a function of retinal arteriole caliber size, and optic disc size
^111^
. And, for transgender women, there may be novel histological findings following complications with gender-affirming surgery
^112^
.
It may thus be beneficial to include protected attributes such as sex, ethnicity and ancestry into AI algorithms, especially when the target label is strongly associated with the protected attribute. An example is integrating histology and patient-sex information in AI algorithms, as it can improve predictions of the origin of a tumour in metastatic cancers of unknown primary. This could be used as an assistive tool in recommending diagnostic immunohistochemistry for difficult-to-diagnose cases. Although the sex of a patient can be viewed as a sensitive attribute, not including this information may result in unusual diagnoses, such as predicting the prostate as the origin of a tumour in cases of cancer of unknown primary in women
^113^
. Another example: the prediction of mutations from whole-slide images via deep learning could become a low-cost screening approach for inferring genetic aberrations without the need for high-throughput sequencing. It could be used to predict biomarkers (such as microsatellite instability) that guide the use of immune-checkpoint inhibition therapy
^114^
, or of EGFR status to guide the selection of a tyrosine kinase inhibitor in the treatment of lung cancer
^115^
. However, if the patient were to be trained on TCGA and evaluated on the PIONEER cohort, it may predict false EGFR mutation frequency in Asian patients and fail to correct cancer-treatment strategies for this population. In this particular instance, using protected class information such as ancestry as a conditional label may improve performance on mutation prediction tasks. Yet disentangling genetic variation and measuring the contribution of ancestry towards phenotypic variation in the tissue microenvironment is currently precluded by the lack of suitable, large and publicly available datasets. Moreover, it is generally unclear where and when protected attributes can be used to improve cancer outcomes. And bias mitigation strategies that consider the inclusion of protected attributes are few
^116,117^
.
The importance of developing diverse data biobanks is well known in the context of genome-wide association studies, where variations in linkage disequilibrium structures and minor allele frequencies across ancestral populations can contribute to worsening the performance of polygenic risk models for under-represented populations
^118^
. Indeed, a fixed effect meta-analysis found that polygenic-risk models for schizophrenia trained only on European populations performed worse for East

<!-- PAGE 9 -->

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01056-8

## Table 1 | Sex and race demographics of well-known biomedical benchmark datasets used in machine learning and in fairness evaluation

| Dataset | Modalities | Number of patients | Female patients (%) | White (%) | Black (%) | Asian (%) | Hispanic or Latino (%) | Pacific Islander or Native Hawaiian (%) | American Indian or Alaskan Native (%) | Unknown or other (%) | Audit ref. |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| TCGA^10,11^ | Pathology, MRI, CT, genomics | 10,963 | 48.5 | 67.5 | 7.9 | 5.9 | 0.3 | 0.01 | 0.2 | - | 9 |
| UK Biobank^12^ | Genomics | 503,317 | 54.4 | 94.6 | 1.6 | 2.3 | - | - | - | 1.5 | 142 |
| PCONES^13^ | Genomics | 1,482 | 43.4 | - | - | 100 | - | - | - | - | N/A |
| eMerge Network^14^ | Genomics | 20,247 | - | 777 | 16.1 | 0.1 | - | 0.2 | 0.2 | 4.5 | 229 |
| NHANES^15^ | Lab measurement | 15,560 | 50.4 | 33.9 | 26.3 | 10.5 | 22.7 | - | - | 6.5 | 339,514 |
| Undiagnosed EMR data^16^ | EMRs, billing transactions | 46,618 | 62.9 | 87.7 | 12.3 | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| CAP^17^ | Urothelial cancer | 4,172 | 57.4 | 70.9 | 29.1 | - | - | - | - | - | 3,359 |
| SIRI-SHINE^18,19^ | Demography | 2,056 | 48.0 | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | 361,362 |
| NH ANEDS^20^ | Fundraising | 4,203 | 56.7 | 97.7 | 1.4 | 8.0 | 2.0 | 1.2 | 1.0 | - | 163 |
| RadFusion^21^ | EMRs, CT | 1,794 | 52.1 | 62.6 | - | - | - | - | - | - | 374 | 365 |
| CPTAC^22^ | Pathology, proteomics | 234.7 | 36.5 | 3.3 | 10.0 | 2.3 | 0.1 | 0.4 | 49.1 | N/A | N/A |
| MMAC^23,24^ | Chest X-rays, EMRs, waveforms | 43,005 | 44.1 | 68.2 | 9.2 | 2.9 | 4.0 | 0.2 | 0.2 | 0.2 | 10,934,275 | 336,359 |
| CheckPoint^25^ | Chest X-rays, spiral CT | 84,740 | 41.0 | 87.0 | 6.0 | 13.0 | - | - | - | 11.3 | 336,359 |
| NIH-SEER^26,27^ | Chest X-rays, spiral CT | 16,450 | 45.0 | 90.8 | 4.4 | 2.0 | 1.7 | 0.4 | 0.4 | 2.0 | 370,363 |
| RSPCT^28^ | CT | 370 | 53.0 | 90.0 | 10.0 | - | - | - | - | - | N/A |
| DHA^29^ | Limb X-rays | 691 | 48.2 | 52.0 | 48.2 | - | - | - | - | - | N/A |
| EMBED^30^ | Mammography | 15,910 | 100 | 38.9 | 41.6 | 6.5 | 5.6 | 1.0 | - | 11.3 | 114 |
| Optum^31^ | EMRs, billing transactions | 5,802,865 | 56.1 | 67.0 | 7.5 | 2.8 | 7.5 | - | - | 15.2 | 95 |
| eCCLC^32,33^ | EMRs | 200,859 | 46.0 | 77.3 | 10.6 | 1.6 | 3.7 | - | 0.9 | 5.9 | 375 |
| Heritage Health^34,35^ | EMRs | 107,721 | 54.4 | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | 170,270 |
| Pima Indians Diabetes^36^ | Population health study | 768 | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | 100 | 381,271 |
| Warfarin^37,38^ | Drug relationship | 5,052 | - | 55.3 | 8.9 | 30.3 | - | - | - | - | 383 |
| Infant Health (DHF)^39^ | Clinical measures | 985 | 50.9 | 36.9* | 52.5 | - | 10.7 | - | - | - | 170,386 |
| DrugNet^40^ | Clinical measures | 203 | 28.4 | 8.5* | 33.8 | - | 53.9 | - | - | - | 387 |

^1^
Reported demographic data were collected for all patient populations in the original dataset. Model auditing may use only certain subsets, owing to missing labels or to insufficient samples for evaluation in the case of extremely under-represented minorities, or owing to targeting different protected attributes (such as age, income and geography). Dashes denote demographic data were not made publicly available, or reported. *Owing to white and other/unknown labels. ARIES, Age-Related Eye Disease Study; CPTAC, Clinical Proteomics Tumor Analysis Consortium; DHA, Digital Hand Atlas; eCCLC-CRD, Electronic Clinical Collaborative Research Database; EMBED, EMory Breast Imaging Database; MMAC, electronic medical record; OI, immune cells; N/A, Not Stated; National Lung Screening Trial; N/A, not applicable; CAP, Cancer of the Urinary Tract; RSPCT, RAdioSPECT Evaluation; CT dataset; SIRI-SHINE, Statistical Information Sharing Imaging Collaboration.

### Asian populations, owing to differing allele frequencies33

Additionally, cross-asciety association studies that include populations from divergent ancestries have uncovered novel loci
^34^
.

### Image acquisition and measurement variation

Variations in image acquisition and measurement technique can also lead protected class information. In this type of covariate shift (also known as domain shift or acquisition shift), institution-specific protocols and other non-biological factors that affect data acquisition can induce variability in the acquired data
^35,36^
. For example, X-ray mammography or computed tomography (CT) images are affected by radiation dosage. Similarly, in pathology, heterogeneities in tissue preparation and in staining protocols as well as scanner-specific parameters for slide digitization can affect model performance in slide-level cancer diagnostic tasks (Fig. 4).

Domain shift as a result of site-specific or region-specific factors that correlate with demographic characteristics may introduce spurious associations with ethnicity. For example, an audit study assessing site-specific stain variability of pathology slides in TCGA found shifts in stain intensity in the only site (the University of Chicago) that had a greater prevalence of patients of African ancestry
^37^
. Hence, clinical-grade AI algorithms in pathology may be learning inadvertent cues for ethnicity owing to institution-specific staining patterns. In this instance of domain shift, variable staining intensity can be corrected

<!-- PAGE 10 -->

using domain adaptation and optimal transport techniques that adapt the test distribution to the training dataset. This can be performed either in the input space or the representation space. For instance, deep domain adaptation techniques using adversarial training transform a form of style transfer, in which a GAN can be used to pre-process data samples to make it more similar to the training distribution
^100^
. However, a practical limitation in both mitigation strategies is that they require a large transfer dataset, a requirement that may not be feasible tuned with data from the test distribution for each deployment site, which can be challenging owing to data interoperability challenges and costs and the need for additional requirements for data.

In some applications, understanding sources of shift presents a challenge for the development of bias mitigation strategies that remove unwanted confounding factors. For instance, CNs can reliably predict risk in chest X-ray and other radiographs after controlling for image acquisition factors, removing some of the confounding that severely degrading image quality
^101^
.

### Evolving dataset shifts over time

Dataset shifts can also occur as a result of changes in diagnostic criteria and/or patient groups and/or populations. This is known as concept shift or concept drift
^102^
, and it involves a change in the conditional distribution 
P(Y|X)
 or 
P(Y|X, Z)
 over time, where 
Z
 is a set of distributional and/or 
P(Y)
 remain unchanged. Concept shift is similar to other temporal inductive shift (such as label shift), in that an increased prevalence of disease 
Y
 (for example, pneumonia) (for instance, cough) does not change the causal relationship 
P(Y|X)
. However, in concept shift, the relationship between 
X
 and 
Y
 changes. This can occur if the criteria for diagnosing disease 
Y
 are revised over time or are incongruous with the definitions, and/or if the population samples of patients include the migration from ICD-8 to ICD-9, which reflected the coding for surgical procedures; the subsequent migration from ICD-9 to ICD-10, which resulted in a more granular and more related coding structure
^103^
; and the more recent recategorization of ICD-10 to ICD-11, which has introduced strokes as neurological disorders rather than cardiovascular diseases.

Taxonomies and classification systems for many diseases undergo continuous evolution, owing to new evidence and/or to changes in findings from randomized controlled trials. These changes may cause substantial shifts in the way that diseases are diagnosed across time. An example of this is the assessment of kidney transplantation using the Banff classification (which since 1991 has established diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis and grading of chronic allograft dysfunction). The Banff classification has been subject to several major revisions: the introduction of a diagnosis based on antibody-mediated rejection (ABMR) in 1997; the specification of chronic ABMR on the basis of a transplant glomerulopathy biomarker in 2005; and the requirement for evidence of antibody-mediated rejection in the microvascular endothelium as a prerequisite for diagnosing chronic ABMR in 2013 (Banff 2013). This is a double-edged diagnostic sword
^104^
. Other notable examples are the shift from the Fuhrman nuclear grading system to the WHO/International Society of Urological Pathology grading system in renal cell carcinoma, the refinement of the definition of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma to include molecular subtyping, the ongoing refinement of American College of Pathology/American Society of Clinical Oncology guidelines defining hyperviscosity severity and the T-19 “varying diagnostic criteria for Behcet’s disease that have been proposed around the world”
^105^
. In some instances, in medicine, the introduction of a large number of historical data (to overcome data paucity), numerous pitfalls may be encountered in ABMR; they may include uncertainty in addressing changing disease prevalence, may be trained and deployed across healthcare systems with different labeling systems and may be trained

that under-affected by hospitalizations that do not meet the data for under-represented populations. The fairness of an AI SMD under concept shift has been rarely analyzed, yet it is well documented that many institutions and health care systems have poor data sharing and agreement, which suggests that an algorithm trained in one country may not be fair in another country
^106^
. To mitigate label shifts and concept shifts, some guidelines have emphasized the importance of guaranteeing model stability and the data over time as a means to ensure that the model approaches for intervening on temporal dataset shifts in early warning systems such as the COVID-19 pandemic
^107^
. This is a significant moment, there are relatively few strategies for the mitigation of concept shift in AI SMDs.

### Variations in self-reported race

With concept shift and temporal data distributions, different geographic regions and countries may collect protected attribute data with varying levels of stringency and granularity, which complicates the interpretation of race as a social construct and as a variable in medical AI. In addition to historical inequities that have confounded the self-reporting of race, there are additional self-reported race and the active evolution of the understanding of race itself
^108^
. As discussions regarding race and ethnicity have moved more into the mainstream, the medical community has become more aware of the fact that the past did not adequately represent the groups of people that they were trying to understand. This has led to the realization that there is a greater genetic variability within a particular race than there are between races
^109^
. As such, the categorization of patients by race can obscure culture, history, socioeconomic status and other confounders of fairness; indeed, they may all separately or synergistically influence a particular patient’s health outcome. Race may vary by location: the same person may be considered of different races depending on the location of the hospital. Race is also self-reported ethnicity in the TCGA and PIONEER cohorts, and they self-reported race in the COMPOS algorithm
^110^
.

Ideally, discussions should centre explicitly around each component of race and include ancestry, a concept that has a clear definition, the geographic origins of one’s ancestors—and that is directly connected to the patient’s underlying genetic admixture and hence to many traits and diseases. However, introducing this granularity into race evaluations would require a large amount of data and a subgroup analysis, as ancestry DNA testing is not routinely performed in the clinic. This is a potential barrier to the use of ancestry data, falling back on the traditional “drop-down menu” for selecting only a single race or ethnicity. Performing fairness evaluations without explicitly accounting for the potential confounders of race may result in AI system is sensitive to unaccounted-for factors
^111^
.

### Paths forward

#### Using federated learning to increase data diversity

Federated learning is a distributed machine learning paradigm in which a network of participants uses their own computing resources and local data to collaboratively train a central model. This approach enables a central machine learning performed over a centralized pool of training data. In federated learning users in principle retain oversight of their own data and may choose to share only a subset of it (for example, only certain signals with privacy-preserving guarantees) from their locally trained model with the central model. This approach has the potential to be used on large and diverse datasets without sharing sensitive information. Federated learning has been applied to a variety of clinical settings to improve disease detection and classification
^112^
. For example, a sensitive health data from being shared and to tackle low-data regimes in the context of COVID-19
^113^
. Federated learning has also been applied to rare diseases
^114,115^
. Federated learning applied to EMRs has satisfied privacy-preserving guarantees for transferring sensitive health data

<!-- PAGE 11 -->

and has enabled the development of early warning systems for hospitalization, sepsis and other preventive tasks
^10,11^
. In academia, federated learning under various network architectures, privacy preserving approaches and adversarial settings has made much institutional collaboration to the validation of AI algorithms for prostate segmentation
^12^
, cancer detection
^13^
, and the prediction of the progression of Alzheimer's disease using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and the classification of paediatric chest X-ray images
^14^
. In pathology, federated learning has been used to improve robustness and reduce the amount of weakly supervised algorithms for the analysis of whole slide images
^15^
, and to improve privacy in the analysis of health records and prognostic tasks
^16^
. It has also been used to overcome low sample sizes in the development of AI models for COVID-19 pathology, and in the analysis of patient cohort data
^17^
.

Regarding fairness, federated learning for the development of decentralized AI models can be naturally extended to address many of the cases of dataset shift and to mitigate disparate impact via model development on larger and more diverse patient populations
^18^
. In developing a risk score, genetic and clinical information infrastructures have been shown to harmonize biobank protocols and to enable federated learning across multiple institutions
^19^
. Biobanks
^20,21^
, which can then enable model development on large and diverse biobank datasets
^22^
, and federated learning applied to multi-site domain adaptation across distributed datasets can be used to mitigate the imbalances of dataset shift
^23,24^
. In particular, methods such as federated domain adaptation and domain generalization are practical examples such as when centralized labeled data are made available only at the site (source) and the unlabeled data are distributed across multiple clients as targets
^25^
. The application of federated learning in fairness may allow for new fairness criteria, such as client-based fairness that requires each client performance at only the client level
^26,27^
, as well as novel formulations of existing bias-mitigation strategies that may not require centralized information about protected attributes for evaluating fairness criteria
^28^
.

**Operationalizing fairness principles across healthcare ecosystems**

Although federated learning may overcome data interoperability standards and enable the training of AI-SMDs with diverse cohorts, the evaluation of AI biases in federated learning settings would need to be extended. Despite the recent advances in federated learning, the communication efficiency, robustness and security of parametric models in the central server setting remain challenging issues that are not independent and/or not identically distributed (known as non-I.I.D data). This arises because of the sometimes vast differences in local data distribution compared to the global data distribution. The presence of local model weights during training following synchronized updates
^29^
 is a key challenge. Accordingly, the performance of federated algorithms (including that of the well-known FedAvg algorithm
^30,31^
) that use averaging to aggregate local model parameter updates deteriorates significantly when the local data distributions are non-I.I.D. Such training challenges may produce further disparate impact depending on the local data distributions and the data sharing policies. For instance, in using multi-site data in the TCGA invasive breast carcinoma (BRCA) cohort as individual clients for federated learning, a majority of parametric models may come from the majority of the patients in the cohort with European ancestry, with only one parameter update coming from a local client that has a majority of patients from the African ancestry. This problem can be decomposed into two phenomena. Known as local drift (when clients are biased towards minimizing the loss objective of their own local data) and global drift (when clients are biased towards updating gradients from clients with mismatched data distributions). As a result, federated learning algorithms may not be able to converge for non-I.I.D. scenarios inherently adapt dataset shift and bias-mitigation techniques to resolve local and global drift in tandem with evaluating

models would still be subject to persisting biases found in centralized models, such as the problems of site-specific image stain variability, and other biases found in the organization and data collection sites in the multi-site TCGA BRCA cohort
^32^
. Federated learning may also be used to mitigate the biases found in the data collected in separate databases, there may be logistic barriers to accessing such patient-centered information.

The difficulty of operationalizing fairness principles for the much simpler AI development and deployment life cycles of centralized models will also affect the practical adoption of fair federated learning paradigms. In current organizational structures, the roles and responsibilities of data scientists and data engineers (which are typically isolated into practitioner
^33^
 or data regulator roles
^34^
) (which design AI fairness checklists for guiding the ethical development of algorithms in the organization and data collection sites and roles) (which follow the checklist during algorithm implementation)
^35^
, and data engineers (which may be responsible for the development of fairness checklists are often too broad or abstractive, and are not co-designed with engineers to address problem-specific and technical challenges for the development and deployment of AI-SMDs. The design of fairness checklists for the development and deployment of AI-SMDs in the healthcare domain from all relevant healthcare roles (in particular, clinicians, ethics practitioners, engineers and researchers), as well as further involvement from stakeholders at participating institutions so as to identify potential site-specific biases that may be propagated during parameter sharing or model training, may be required to be carried out at inference time
^36^
.

Overall, although federated learning presents an opportunity to evaluate AI algorithms on diverse biomedical data at a global scale, it faces unknown challenges in the design of global fairness checklists that consider the local data distribution and the local region. For instance, a federated scheduling algorithm for patient follow-ups calibrated to set a high threshold to maximize fairness criteria may not account for substantial differences in burden (which could be much higher at a low resource setting)
^37^
. As with the problem of “label shift”
^38^
, the local data distribution may not be the same as there may be additional complexity arising from culture-specific factors
^39^
 and the local data distribution may be different from definitions and criteria for fairness from differing moral and ethical philosophies
^40^
. Navigating such ethical conflicts may involve the development of a fairness-aware stakeholder engagement and under-represented populations.

**Fair representation learning**

By focusing on learning intermediate representations that retain discriminative features for the input space X without any formal relationship with A, typically via an adversarial loss term (Fig. 1), fair representation learning has been used to mitigate the biases found in many other subjects in machine learning, and shares techniques and goals with adversarial learning for debiasing representations. Inspired by the methods of GANs, fairness-aware representation learning has been used to learn domain invariant features of the distributions of the input space X and the protected attribute A, such that treatment invariant representations for producing counterfactual explanations
^41,42^
 and race-invariant or ethnicity-invariant features for mitigating disparate impact in the input space X without any formal relationship with A
^43^
.

Although fair representation methods are typically supervised, fairness for federated learning may be achieved by using representations to be freely transferred to other domains without constraints on the downstream classifiers (such as being fair or

<!-- PAGE 12 -->

establish greater applications of fair algorithms without an a priori protected attributes
^10,11,12^
. One prominent example is the method known as learned adversarial fair and transferable representation (LAFTR) which is a first model that is designed to be objective with an adversarial loss term to make the latent feature representation invariant to protected class. LAFTR is a deep neural network representation that is transferable (as examined in the Charlson Comorbidity Index prediction task in the Heritage Health dataset), in which LAFTR was able to train on a task without the protected attribute and then transfer to other tasks in medicine. LAFTR can be extended as a privacy-preserving machine learning approach that is designed to be objective with no mediate features. This could advance multi-institutional collaboration in the time-cuing of algorithms without leaking sensitive information. The LAFTR is unsupervised and does not require any additional attribute-invariant cluster assignments (which can also be done via adversarial learning for debiased representations)
^13,14^
. Still, a main limitation in many of these unsupervised fairness approaches is that they depend on having the protected attribute at hand during training, which may not be possible in many real-world settings in which protected class identity is secured. Moreover, in assessing the accuracy-fairness trade-off in addition to traditional accuracy metrics, there may be other representation quality and thus lower performance in downstream fairness tasks.

Debiased access to protected attributes possibly constraining model training, geographical data in the client identities may be used as proxies for subgroups, and the use of these proxies in the development of fairness techniques without access to sensitive information. Decentralized frameworks have shown that federated learning can be used with representations that are known to be used to inform federated, adversarial and debiasing representations with similar performance and transferability properties as LAFTR
^15,16,17^
. Using client identities as proxy variables for protected attributes in adversarial learning may hold promise for future research, as geographically located is more closely linked to genetic diversity than is “psychological”.

### Debiased representations via disentanglement

Disentanglement in generative models can also be used to further personalize models in learned representations of latent features required to protect attributes. It aims at disentangling independent and easy-to-interpret features of data in latent space, and has allowed for the use of sources of variation that are not related to the color, position and shape
^18,19^
. BetaVAE is a method to quantify disentangled representations of data in latent space
^20^
. Disentanglement is a bottleneck for unsupervised learning, followed by the generation of a disentangled score by training a linear classifier to predict the fixed effects of the latent space from the representation. Disentangled features in adversarial loss components have been used to disentangle size, skin color and other ethnicity indicators, as well as causing disentangled conditions and anatomical features in physiological waveforms
^20,21^
.

With regards to fairness and dataset shifts, disentanglement can be viewed as a way of data preprocessing to reduce representation in downstream fairness tasks and for providing flexibility in terms of allowing for a more generalization of the latent space
^22,23^
. The correspond to protected attributes in representation space
^24,25,26^
. The evaluation of unsupervised VAE-based disentangled models has shown that disentanglement scores are higher for the latent space that is marked on numerous fairness-classification tasks without the need for disentanglement. This indicates that disentanglement would be particularly advantageous in settings where the latent code information for including and excluding protected attributes needs to be flexibly adapted. For example, in methods that are used to predict recidivism when predicting cancer stage yet included when predicting mutation status. The disentanglement-like approach may also be used to reduce faces without latent code information according to dominant features such as skin color and hair color
^27,28^
. In chest X-ray images, they

have also been shown to mitigate hidden biases in chest X-ray images
^29^
. In combination with federated learning, FedDis and related frameworks have been used to isolate sensitive attributes in the latent space of VAEs
^30^
. This approach is being investigated according to shape and appearance features, with only the shape parameter shared between clients
^31^
.

### Disentangling the roles of data regulators and data users in life cycles of AI/SMs

Within current development and deployment life cycles of AI/SMs, data regulators and data users are often considered as fair-representation and disentanglement methods would allow the refinement of the distribution of responsibilities in organizational structures by adding the role of “data producers” that is, those who produce “cleaned up” versions of the input for more information-downstream tasks, as proposed previously
^32^
. In this setting, the roles of “data users” and “data regulators” would be separate and compatible with conventional model development pipelines without the need to consider additional fairness constraints
^33^
. Moreover, data regulators would also quantify the potential accuracy-fairness trade-offs when applying additional data processing methods to the data as mentioned. In the context of AI/SMs, data regulators would be able to provide a path forward for a three-party governance model that is compliant with the principles of fairness and transparency
^34^
. Data accuracy-fairness trade-offs, and that adapts to test populations without significant changes in the data distribution, would be the responsibility of “data users”. Still, fair representation learning has yet to be benchmarked against competitive self-supervised learning methods particularly in disentangled learning, and more evaluations of fair representation learning in clinical settings are also needed
^35^
. Future work on understanding the role of data regulators and data users in self-supervised learning paradigms would contribute to improving fairness in AI/SMs, and may be used to serve as a privacy-preserving measure for clinical machine-learning tasks
^36^
.

### Algorithmic interpretability for building fair and trustworthy AI

Algorithmic frameworks for the development of AI/SMs, algorithm interpretability is pivotal in medical decision-making and in model auditing so as to understand the sources of unfairness and biases in AI/SMs
^37^
. Interpretability is a key component for consideration in current regulation of AI/SMs. As a conceptualization of fairness, interpretability is a key component in the development of regulatory bodies, trust is the fulfillment of a contract in human-AI/contract. Such contracts are AI functionalities that are anticipated to be invoked when requested by the user
^38^
. The fulfillment of a contract that anticipates patterns that distinguish the model’s correct and incorrect behavior is a key component. The model’s behavior is a contract (concerning technical robustness, safety, non-discrimination and transparency, in particular) outlined by the European Commission’s AI Act
^39^
. Algorithmic interpretability is a key component in the European Machine Learning Practice guidelines outlined this assessment and interpretation of the contract
^40^
. Interpretability is a key component in AI/SMs
^41^
. In the remainder of this section, we discuss current applications of algorithmic interpretability, and their relevance to fairness in AI/SMs.

#### Interpretability methods and model auditing

For post-hoc interpretability in deep-learning architectures, class activation maps (CAMs, or saliency mapping) are a commonly used technique for interpreting the input features that are most important to the decision made by an algorithm. CAMs compute the partial derivatives of the output of the neural network with respect to the input features in the back-propagation step of the neural network. The derivatives are then used to produce a visualization of the informative pixel

<!-- PAGE 13 -->

## Perispective

[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01056-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01056-8)

**Fig. 1**
 A decentralized framework that integrates federated learning with adversarial learning and disentanglement. In addition to aiding the development of algorithms using larger and more diverse patient populations, federated learning can be integrated with many techniques in representation learning and in unsupervised domain adaptation that can learn in the presence of unobserved protected attributes. In federated learning, global and local weights are shared between the global server and the local clients (such as different hospitals in different countries), each with different datasets of whole-slide image (WSIs) and image patches. Different domain adaptation methods can be used with federated learning. In federated adversarial and debiasing (FAD), the client IDs were used as protected attributes, and adversarial learning was used to

debias the representation so that it did not vary with geographic region
^100^
. In FcTfS, shape and appearance features in brain MRI scans were disentangled, with only the shape parameter shared between clients
^101^
 (orange). In federated adversarial domain adaptation (FADA), disentanglement and adversarial learning were used to further mitigate domain shifts across clients
^102^
 (red and orange). Federated learning can also be used in combination with style transfer, synthetic data generation, and image normalization. In these cases, domain-adapted target data or features would need to be shared, or other techniques employed (green)
^103–105^
. 
*A*
 and 
*B*
, and 
*C*
, and 
*D*
, respectively, the model’s outcome and a protected attribute.

regions
^100^
. To produce more fine-grained visualizations, extensions of these methods (such as Grad-CAM) instead attribute how neurons of an intermediate feature layer in a CNN would affect its output, such that the attributions for these intermediate features can be up-sampled to the original image size and viewed as a mask to identify discriminative image regions
^106^
. CAM-based methods have gained widespread adoption in the clinical interpretability of the output of CNNs, because salient regions (rather than low-level pixel intensities) would refer to high-level image features. Because these techniques can be applied without modifying the neural networks, they have been

used in preclinical applications such as the detection of skin lesions, the localization of disease in chest X-ray images and the segmentation of organs in CT images
^107–110^
.

However, saliency-mapping techniques may not be accurate, understandable to humans or actionable, and thus insufficiently trustworthy by practitioners in medical support, decision making, biomarker discovery and model auditing
^111^
. Indeed, interpretability via saliency mapping is typically qualitative but not sufficiently quantifiable to evaluate group differences. An audit of Grad-CAM interpretability in natural images and in echocardiograms found that

Nature Biomedical Engineering | Volume 7 | June 2023 | 719–742

731

<!-- PAGE 14 -->

salience maps can be misleading and often equivalent to results for simple edge detectors
^38,39^
. In the diagnosis of chest radiographs, saliency mapping techniques are insufficiently accurate if used to localize the most salient features
^40^
. In cancer diagnosis, although fully in highlighting important regions of interest in histology tissue, saliency maps highlight areas that are not used by radiologists for patient stratification without further post-hoc assessment
^41^
. And in the problem of unknown dataset shifts of radiology images reported in a recent study, model-based saliency mapping is ineffective in determining any explainable anatomic landmarks or imaging features that could be used to diagnose the disease
^42^
. Saliency mapping can be used to detect spurious bugs or artefacts in the input feature space (although they do not always detect them in the output space)
^43,44^
. Models that are trained on the visual cortex of saliency mapping may be informative for some uses in medical interpretation. Its many limitations preclude its use for enhancing input to AI algorithms and for the assessment of fairness in their clinical deployment.

Techniques such as Shapley additive explanations (SHAP) and Integrated Gradients have also found utility in explaining machine learning predictions in medicine across a variety of applications
^45–50^
. In SHAP, feature importance values are computed by decomposing the model output into a sum of attribution units, with each unit relating to the contribution of a single feature to the model output. In healthcare applications, these methods have been used to predict drug response
^51^
, predict in-hospital readmission data, to corroborate the prognostic value of hallmark genes and morphological markers in cancer survival, and to identify novel risk factors for EMR data for mortality prediction
^52–54^
. As with saliency mapping, SHAP-based and Integrated Gradients-based methods have been used post-hoc explainability in that they can be used to sensitize the choice of ‘baseline’ input for conveying the absence of a signal, to illumination and convergence issues
^55^
 and other parameters, and these assumptions should be carefully considered when used in clinical applications. Differently, these techniques attribute features to a global level but not feature-wise (for example, they are not overall feature importance) and a local level for individual samples (for example, individual predictions) but not sample-wise (they can be extended to measure global and individual fairness criteria and other model auditing applications)
^56^
. For instance, as group-fairness metrics are commonly used as performance measures of model fairness across protected subgroups, SHAP can be directly used to decompose the impact of protected model features on following metrics: the impact of influential features on disparity measures
^57^
. Other analyses have found that greater disparity measures correlate with greater salience values for the features that are most strongly attributed by SHAP
^58^
. In model auditing applications, on the MIMIC dataset, an approach involving moral reasoning and using Integrated Gradients found disparities in feature importance across ethnicity, gender and age subgroups, with ethnicity often ranked as one of the most important features across a set of models and algorithms and ability techniques
^59,60^
. On National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHES) data, a global analysis of SHAP values found that disparities in discovering relationships between race and access to food programs in predicting 15-year survival rates
^61^
. In other studies, however, SHAP and Integrated Gradients have been found to be in tension with the faithfulness of explanations on the OpenAI fairness benchmark compared to other approaches
^62^
. This is due to the sensitivity of the baseline choice and other parameters in these class of methods
^63^
. Still, SHAP can be used in many other ways in fairness beyond feature importance values as it can be used to identify points that are influential model performance in data resource allocation, attributing model performance change to a specific data distribution
^64^
, and attributing the contribution of participants in fair federated learning
^65^
.

### Setting algorithmic design requirements for explainability

Although algorithm interpretability techniques are model agnostic, their efficacy and performance are highly dependent on the design of data modalities and model architectures, and thus have important implications for clinical decision-making. For instance, the use of AI/ML models in the choice of algorithm design. For instance, structured modalities such as imaging data can be difficult to interpret due to the complexity of the data, and thus require the use of attribution methods compared to influential pixels in a CNN are less meaningful in explaining the model’s decision
^66^
. On the other hand, SHAP-based and Integrated Gradients-based methods have been extensively validated to perform well on regulatory genomics data
^67^
. As such, regulatory agencies may enforce specific criteria for building trustworthy AI such as quantifying feature importance and fairness/disparity measures. This motivation also led to the design of algorithms that would see clinical deployment, potentially inspiring new types of deep-learning approaches with inherent interpretability mechanisms. For instance, instance CNNs, which enhance in computer vision have proposed the usage of Transformers to explain the decision-making process of a model and to produce prototypical explanations
^68^
. In this setting, instead of attributing individual pixels, attributions in the form of attention weights are used to generate high-level visual concepts, such as the ‘blue crown’ and ‘blue back’ attributes that can occur frequently in blue jay birds, or ‘famous’ lyrics or ‘famous’ artists to explain the decision of a music classifier
^69^
. In contrast with the poor localization performance of saliency mapping in chest X-ray images, high-attention regions identified within histology slides can have strong agreement with clinical annotations of the anatomical regions of ‘interest’
^70^
. With increasing progress in explainability, there have been new methods known as ‘foundation models’ with capabilities such as zero-shot classification, few-shot learning, object segmentation and chain-of-thought reasoning, new definitions of model evaluation strategies and to develop to understand the extent of trust and explainability, especially when the models are deployed in the real world
^71^
.

The development of handcrafted and human-interpretable features has been a challenge in bioinformatics and genomics. The statistical contour-based and image-based cell features have been shown to predict molecular signatures, such as immune-checkpoint expression
^72^
. In the context of cancer genomics, there have been an approach for mitigating and explaining unfairness, handcrafted features have been used to explain the prediction of breast cancer risk based on structured morphology with aggressive cancer phenotypes, and helped elucidate population-specific phenotypes for African American breast cancer
^73^
. As a result of the recent advances in deep learning, we may have niche applications, for instance in the context of small data, where the use of handcrafted features and other explainability approaches in these settings may fulfill trust better by providing more coherent and actionable clinical interpretability to the user, or by providing further insights into the design of the model
^74^
. We believe that features obtained via deep learning and handcrafted features will be used in the emerging assessment of harm by AI models via interpretability techniques.

### Outlook

Medicine ought to account for genetic ancestry, socioeconomic status and other factors in the design of AI/ML models in medicine
^75^
. However, AI algorithms can exacerbate healthcare disparities, owing to insufficient genetic diversity in biomedical datasets, to disparities in medical data collection and use, to disparities in systems and to other forms of dataset shifts that may cause disparate performance across different groups
^76^
. In this context, understanding and addressing these concerns by developing bias-mitigating strategies in AI/ML models, the opinions and expertise of clinical practitioners

<!-- PAGE 15 -->

and other suitable stakeholders in the healthcare ecosystem, as well as those of machine learning researchers and engineers, must be included. In this Perspective, we have argued that federated learning, fair representation learning, and federated privacy can be used to incorporate fairness into the design and training of AI models. We have also argued that distribution- and data-servicing gateways can be used in domain-specific and shared challenges to the stakeholders contributing to advancing healthcare equality.

## References

Burkhardt, J., & Gebur, T. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender classification. In 
*Conf. on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency*
 77–91 (PMLR, 2018).

Bermejo, T., Powers, R., & Mulvaney, M. S. Multinomial, S. 2019. Fairness in an algorithm used to manage the health of patients. 
*Nature Med.*
 27, 139–140 (2021).

Patterson, S. (2019) Seeing beyond algorithmic bias is a data problem. 
*Hackers*
, 2, 100241 (2021).

Chen, Z., Chodera, M. D., Joshi, S., Mazou, M. & Anderson, J. A. Ethical limitations of algorithmic fairness measures in health care machine learning. 
*Nature Digit. Health*
 2, e2221–e223 (2022).

Mishra, S., Zhou, Y., Zhao, Y. & Chakraborty, R. Fairness learning and algorithmic fairness in public and population health. 
*Nat. Mach. Intell.*
 3, 859–868 (2021).

Currie, G., & Hawk, K. E. Ethical and legal challenges of artificial intelligence in nuclear medicine. In 
*Seminars in Nuclear Medicine*
 (Elsevier, 2020).

Chen, Y. et al. Ethical machine learning in healthcare. 
*Annu. Rev. Biochem.*
 92, 423–454 (2023).

Howard, F. M. et al. The impact of site-specific digital histology signatures on deep learning model accuracy and bias. 
*Nat. Commun.*
 12, 4423 (2021).

Sreyed Kalantari, L., Liu, G., McDermott, M., Chen, L. Y. & Chakraborty, R. Machine learning fairness in deep chest X-ray classifiers. In 
*BIOMCUTTING 2021: Proc. Pacific Symposium*
 232–243 (World Scientific, 2021).

Chen, Z., Chodera, M. D., Joshi, S., Mazou, M., Chen, Y. & Chakraborty, R. Underdiagnosis bias of artificial intelligence algorithms applied to chest X-rays in under-served patient populations. 
*Nat. Med.*
 27, 2176–2182 (2021).

Gichoya, J. W. et al. An recognition of patient race in medical imaging: a modeling pipeline. 
*Health Equity*
 4, 1405–1412 (2020).

Chen, B., Jones, C., Bernhardt, M. & Wirtzack, S. Algorithmic encoding of protected characteristics in chest X-ray disease detection models. 
*EBioMedicine*
 79, 104427 (2023).

European Academy of Paediatrics. Modifications to Artificial Intelligence. 
*Machine Learning (AI)/Based Software as a Medical Device (SaMD) (US FDA)*
 (2023).

Gauba, S. et al. Do as I say: unsupervised deployment of clinical decision aids. 
*NPJ Digit. Med.*
 4, 31 (2021).

Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI)/Based Software as a Medical Device (SaMD) Action Plan (US FDA, 2023).

Vyas, S. et al. Challenging racial bias in the vignette label after cesarean section calculation. 
*Women's Health issues*
 29, 201–204 (2019).

Vyas, S., Eisenstein, J., G. Jones, D. S. Hidden in plain sight: reconsidering the use of race correction in clinical algorithms. 
*Health Equity*
 3, 288, 874–882 (2019).

van der Burgh, A. C., Hoorn, E. J. & Chakraborty, R. Removing race from kidney function estimates. 
*JAMA*
 325, 2018 (2021).

Diao, J. et al. Clinical implications of removing race from estimates of kidney function. 
*JAMA*
 325, 184–186 (2021).

Caton, S. S. & Haas, C. Fairness in machine learning: a survey. 
*Preprints*
 202104.0001 (2021).

Adler, M. N., Glymour, M. M. & Felding, J. Addressing socio-determinants of health and health inequalities. 
*JAMA*
 316, 1641–1642 (2016).

Phelan, J. C., Link, B. G. Is racism a fundamental cause of inequalities in health? 
*Annu. Rev. Sociol.*
 41, 311–330 (2015).

Yehia, B. R. et al. Association of COVID-19 with comorbidities in patients hospitalized with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in 92 US hospitals. 
*JAMA Netw. Open*
 3, e2010359 (2020).

Lopez, L., Hurt, L. H., Karz, M. H. Racial and ethnic health disparities related to COVID-19. 
*JAMA*
 325, 719–720 (2021).

Bowcik, K. A. LGBT healthcare disparities: what progress have we made? 
*Patient Educ. Couns.*
 100, 2557–2561 (2017).

Varneda, T. et al. Access disparity and health inequality of the elderly: unmet needs and delayed healthcare. 
*Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health*
 12, 1745–1772 (2015).

Moy, E., Dayton, E. & Clancy, C. M. Compiling the evidence: the National health disparities reports. 
*Health Aff.*
 27, 378–381 (2008).

Bata, A. I., Sellar, N., McGuire, T. G. & Bloche, M. G. Clinical care disparities in health care. 
*Ann. J. Law Med.*
 29, 203–219 (2023).

Marmot, M. G. Determinants of health inequalities. 
*Lancet*
 368, 1099–1104 (2006).

Manses, S. B. et al. Social determinants of health and health disparities: COVID-19, racism and income inequality. 
*Am. J. Public Health*
 106, 18–22 (2020).

American people in the United States. 
*Public Health Rep.*
 136, 18–22 (2021).

Seligman, H. K., Larana, B. A. & Kusahl, M. F. Food insecurity is associated with chronic disease among low-income NHANES participants. 
*J. Nat. Med.*
 100, 104–105 (2016).

Thum, M. J., Apicella, L. F. & Henley, S. J. Smoking vs other risk factors as the cause of lung cancer in smokers: confounding in the countries. 
*JAMA*
 284, 708–712 (2000).

Tucker, M. J., Berg, C. J., Callaghan, W. M. & Hsu, J. The Black-white disparity in pregnancy outcomes under different conditions: differences in prevalence and case-fatality rates. 
*Am. J. Public Health*
 96, 161–166 (2006).

Gadson, A., Akposi, E. & Mehta, P. T. Exploring the social determinants of racial/ethnic disparities in prenatal care utilization among maternal outcomes. In 
*Seminars in Perinatology*
 41, 308–317 (Elsevier, 2017).

Williams, M. R. Maternal care deserts and pregnancy-associated mortality in Louisiana. 
*Women's Health Issues*
 21, 122–129 (2021).

Wachowicz, E. G. et al. The importance of race and ethnic background in biomedical research and clinical practice. 
*N. Engl. J. Med.*
 378, 173–175 (2018).

Phinister, E. G. Medicine and the racial divide. 
*N. Engl. J. Med.*
 348, 1081–1082 (2003).

Barber, V. L., Green, E. D. & Perez-Stable, E. J. Examining how race, ethnicity, and ancestry data are used in biomedical research. 
*JAMA*
 320, 1533–1534 (2018).

Ennamay, N. D., Yang, W. & Reese, P. Reconsidering the consequences of using race to estimate kidney function. 
*JAMA*
 325, 113–114 (2021).

Zelink, L. B., Lees, N., Young, B. & Bansal, N. Association of the estimated glomerular filtration rate with or without a coefficient for race with time to eligibility for kidney transplant. 
*JAMA Netw. Open*
 4, e2034004 (2021).

<!-- PAGE 16 -->

Choubdova, S. J. et al. KIDGO clinical practice guideline on the evaluation and management of candidates for kidney transplantation. 
*Transplantation*
 104, 501–510 (2023).

Weissleder, R. et al. Societal impact of health and race disparities in kidney transplant. 
*J. Clin. Am. Soc. Nephrol.*
 16, 2952–2953 (2020).

Kanis, J. H. & N. M. E. & Johansson, H. A brief history of fracture. 
*Osteoporosis*
 13, 118 (2018).

Joseph, E. M., Wright, C. & Singer, J. R. Racial disparities, race, and the care of patients with osteoporosis. 
*Osteoporosis*
 11, 31, 20–29 (2021).

Civil Rights Act of 1964. Title VII, Equal Employment Opportunities. 
[(https://www.law.cornell.edu/wsrc/Civil_Rights_Act_of_1964_(Title_VII))](https://www.law.cornell.edu/wsrc/Civil_Rights_Act_of_1964_(Title_VII))

Orange, D. 
*Duke Power Co. v. United States*
 (1944) (civ. rights). 
*Duke Power Co. (1971)*
.

Awad, E. et al. The moral machine experiment. 
*Nature*
 563, 59–64 (2018).

Feller, A., Pierson, E., Corbett-Davies, S. & Goel, S. A computer program used for fall and sentencing decisions was labeled biased against blacks. It’s actually not that clear. The Washington Post (October 2018).

Dressel, J. & Farid, H. The accuracy, fairness, and limits of predicting recidivism. 
*Sci. Am.*
 315, 168–175 (2016).

Li, D. S., Shah, H. H. & Madras, D. K. Delineating machine learning in health care—addressing ethical challenges. 
*N. Engl. J. Med.*
 381, 981–983 (2019).

Bernhardt, M., Jones, C. & Glocke, B. Potential sources of dataset bias complicate investigations of underdiagnosis by machine learning algorithms. 
*Nat. Med.*
 28, 1157–1158 (2022).

Mulherjee, P. et al. Confounding factors need to be accounted for when assessing bias by machine learning algorithms. 
*Nat. Med.*
 28, 1159–1160 (2022).

Diaz, J. A., Ponce, M. R. & Marras, A. K. Face-free equations for eCRF: comparing effects on CKD classification. 
*J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.*
 32, 1860–1870 (2021).

Hallam, R., Frieder, S. A., Jindal, S., Schledinger, C. & Venkatasubramanian, S. Certifying and removing disparate impact. In: 
*Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining*
 259–268 (2015).

Hardt, M., Price, E. & Srebro, N. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In: 
*Proc. 31st International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining*
 259–268 (2015).

Corbett-Davies, S. & Goel, S. The measure and mismeasure of fairness: a critical review of fair machine learning. Preprint at 
[(https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1808.00028)](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1808.00028)
 (2018).

Galanti, L., Kantrow, F. & Pocock, S. J. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R. R

<!-- PAGE 17 -->

**Perspective**

[https://www.nature.com/articles/s41551-025-01056-5](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41551-025-01056-5)

Reeves, A. L., Liu, A., Mennarini, O. & Zebert, B. B. Robust fairness under covariate shift. In: 
*Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence*
 35, 3419–3427 (2021).

Rubio, D., Iannaccone, N. & Kalai, A. Unleashing linear optimizers for group-fair learning and optimization. In: 
*Conf. Learning Theory*
 2019, 1–22 (2019).

Kearns, M., Neel, S., Roth, A. & Wu, Z. S. Preventing fairness gerrymandering: auditing and learning for subgroup fairness. In: 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 2014, 2523–2531 (PMLR, 2014).

Poplin, R. et al. Prediction of cardiovascular risk factors from retinal photographs via deep learning. 
*Nat. Biomed. Eng.*
 2, 138–144 (2018).

Belenko, B. et al. Detection of signs of disease in external examination of the eyes with deep learning. 
*Nat. Biomed. Eng.*
 6, 1370–1383 (2022).

Kamathia, T., Akshay, S. & Sakuma, J. Fairness-aware learning through regularization approach. In: 
*2018 IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Data Mining Workshops*
 443–450 (IEEE, 2018).

Zafar, M. B., Valera, I., Gomez, R. & Gummadi, K. P. Fairness beyond disparate treatment & disparate impact: learning classification without unfairness. In: 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 2017, 2969–2978. 
*Int. Conf. World Wide Web*
 1771–1780 (2017).

Zemel, R., Wu, Y., Swersky, K., Pitassi, T. & Dwork, C. Learning fair representations. In: 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 2013, 3313–3321 (PMLR, 2013).

Kim, S., Reingold, O. & Rothblum, G. Fairness through computationally bounded awareness. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 24, 1–11 (2011).

Péché, S. R., Foygel, A. & Shah, N. H. An empirical characterization of fair machine learning for clinical risk prediction. 
*J. Biomed. Inform.*
 113, 103021 (2021).

Foygel, A., Péché, S. R., Patel, B. & Shah, N. Evaluating algorithmic fairness in the presence of clinical guidelines: the case of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk estimation. 
*BMJ Health Care AI*
 29, e104040 (2022).

Karner, P. et al. Potential unintended impact of the 2017 ACC/AHA high blood pressure guideline. 
*Circulation*
 137, 109–118 (2018).

Chen, L., Johansson, F. D. & Sontag, D. Why is my classifier discriminatory? In 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 2019, 1–12 (2019).

Raj, I. D. & Budzianowski, A. Actionable auditing: investigating the impact of public policy on the fairness and revenue sources of commercial products. In: 
*Proc. 2019 AAAI/ACM Conf. AI, Ethics, and Society*
 429–435 (2019).

Woldegi, T., Recht, B. & Jordan, M. I. Representation matters: assessing the importance of subgroup allocations in learning. In: 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 2020, 9040–9051 (2020).

Zhao, H. & Gordon, G. Inherent tradeoffs in learning fair representations. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 32, 1657–1665 (2019).

Péché, S. R. et al. Creating fair models of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk. In: 
*Proc. 2019 AAAI/ACM Conf. AI, Ethics, and Society*
 271–278 (2019).

Péché, S. R. Recommendations for Algorithmic Fairness: Assessments of Predictive Modeling. 
*Health Aff.*
 39, 1–10 (2020). Evidence from large-scale Empirical Analyses. PhD thesis, Stanford Univ. (2021).

Singh, A., Kulkarni, R. & Mittal, V. Fairness in AI: A framework for violations and mitigation under covariate shift. In: 
*Proc. 2021 ACM Conf. Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency*
 3–15 (2021).

Wang, H. & Mukherjee, S. Ensuring fairness in healthcare under probability shifts. In: 
*Proc. 2021 AAAI/ACM Conf. AI, Ethics, and Society*
 124–132 (2021).

Ciguere, S. et al. Fairness guarantees under demographic shift. In: 
*Int. Conf. Learning Representations*
 (2022).

Mohler, A. & Dalmasso, N. Fair when trained, unfair when deployed: observable fairness measures are unstable in performative prediction settings. 
*Preprint at*
 
[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.07143](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.07143)
 (2023).

Duchi, J. & Namkoong, H. Learning models with uniform performance guarantees under distributional robust optimization. In: 
*Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 1929–1938 (PMLR, 2020).

Wang, S. et al. Fairness in AI: A survey of fairness with noise-protected groups. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 33, 5161–5203 (2020).

Caston, A. et al. Transfer learning with missing protected attributes. In: 
*Proc. 2019 AAAI/ACM Conf. AI, Ethics, and Society*
 489–499 (2019).

Schumann, C. et al. Transfer of machine learning fairness across domains. In: 
*NeurIPS AI for Social Good Workshop*
 (2019).

Lahoti, S. et al. Fairness in AI: A survey of fairness with adversarially reweighted learning. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 33, 739–750 (2020).

Yan, S., Kao, H.-T. & Ferreira, F. Fair class balancing: enhancing model fairness without observing sensitive attributes. In: 
*Proc. 2020 ACM Conf. Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency*
 1715–1724 (2020).

Zhou, T., Dai, E., Shu, X. & Wang, S. Towards fair classifiers without sensitive attributes: exploring biases in related features. In: 
*Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search and Data Mining*
 1433–1442 (2022).

Quinnemoend, J., Suppaya, M., Liversedge, N. D. & Schwabacher, A. Dataset Shift in Machine Learning (MIT Press, 2020).

Subbaswamy, A., Schulten, P. & Saria, S. Preventing failures due to dataset shift: learning predictive models that adapt. In: 
*22nd Int. Conf. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics*
 3101–3127 (PMLR, 2019).

Subbaswamy, A. & Saria, S. From development to deployment: dataset shift, causality, and shift-stable models in health AI. 
*Biostatistics*
 25, 145–152 (2024).

Guo, L. et al. Evaluation of domain generalization and adaptation on improving model robustness to temporal dataset shift in clinical medicine. 
*Sci. Rep.*
 12, 27205 (2022).

Singh, N., Singh, R., Mhaswade, V. & Churnara, R. Fair predictors under distribution shift. In: 
*NeurIPS Workshop on Fair ML for Health*
 (2019).

Bernhard, M., Jones, C. & Gleckler, B. Investigating understanding of AI algorithms in the presence of multiple sources of dataset bias. 
*Nat. Med.*
 28, 1157–1158 (2022).

Shapire, R. E. & Roth, A. Fairness in machine learning: recent and continuing explorations. In: 
*Proc. AAAI/ACM Conf. AI, Ethics, and Society*
 (2022).

Sagawa, S., Koh, P. W., Hashimoto, T. & B. Liang, P. Distributionally robust neural networks. In: 
*Int. Conf. Learning Representations*
 (2020).

Yang, Y., Zhang, H., Katabi, D. & Ghassami, M. Change is hard: a closer look at subgroup shift. In: 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 2023.

Zeng, Y., Yang, Y. & Hospedales, T. MEDFair: benchmarking fairness in medical imaging. In: 
*Int. Conf. Learning Representations*
 (2023).

Lipton, Z. et al. Deep learning-enabled assessment of cardiac ejection fraction from retinal images. 
*Nat. Med.*
 28, 575–582 (2022).

Redaelli, P. & Griffith, J. R. Classification of hospital patients at surgical: implications of the shift to ICD-9-CM. 
*Med. Care*
 22, 189–192 (1984).

<!-- PAGE 18 -->

128. Heilin, K. G. et al. Trends in opioid-related inpatient stays after the US transition to Opioid-DC monitoring in 2015. 
*Med. Care*
 
**58**
, 918–923 (2020).

129. Casiro, S. C., Walker, J. & Glaesmer, B. Causality matters in medical imaging. 
*Nat. Commun.*
 
**11**
, 3673 (2020).

130. Campanella, P. et al. Integrative analysis of multiple cancer genomics clinical profiles using the cBioPortal. 
*Sci. Signal.*
 
**6**
, pl1 (2013).

131. Beynodt, B. E. et al. Diagnostic assessment of deep learning algorithms for detection of lymph node metastases in breast cancer with breast cancer. 
*JAMA*
 
**318**
, 2199–2210 (2017).

132. Campanella, P. et al. Clinical and computational pathology using weekly supervised deep learning on whole slide images. 
*Nat. Med.*
 
**25**
, 1501–1509 (2019).

133. West, D. J. Characterization of publicly available skin cancer image datasets: a systematic review. 
*Lancet Digit. Health*
 
**4**
, e64–e74 (2022).

134. Khan, S. M. et al. A global review of publicly available datasets for ophthalmic imaging: biases, access, usability, and applicability. 
*Lancet Digit. Health*
 
**4**
, e55–e60 (2022).

135. Mamary, A. J. et al. Race and gender disparities are evident in radiologist diagnoses across a range of measured and unmeasured, chronic Osteo. 
*Plast. Reconstr. Surg.*
 
**117**
, 8 (2018).

136. Steyved-Kalantari, L., Zhang, H., McDermott, M., Chen, L. & Chakravorty, M. Reply to: “Bias in patient data: possible investigation of underdiagnosis by machine learning algorithms and trustworthy reporting of results” in accordance with assessing bias by machine learning algorithm. 
*Nat. Med.*
 
**28**
, 165–166 (2022).

137. Landry, L. G., Ali, W., Williams, D. R., Rehm, H. L. & Rohan, V. L. Lack of diversity in genomic databases is a barrier to translating precision medicine research into practice. 
*Health Aff.*
 
**37**
, 780–785 (2018).

138. Gudjonsson, J. G. et al. Atlas of prostate cancer heritability in European and African-American men pinpoints tissue-specific regulation. 
*Nat. Commun.*
 
**7**
, 10599 (2016).

139. Ohtsuka, A. G. et al. The landscape of recombination in African Americans. 
*Nature*
 
**476**
, 170–175 (2011).

140. Ohtsuka, A. G. et al. Skin pigmentation, bioequivalent ancestry and admixture mapping. 
*Hum. Genet.*
 
**112**
, 387–399 (2003).

141. Sudlow, C. G. A. & Ali, B. Biobank: an open access resource for the global research causes of disease. 
*Nature*
 
**526**
, 688–691 (2015).

142. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

143. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

144. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

145. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

146. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

147. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

148. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

149. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

150. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

151. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

152. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

153. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

154. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

155. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

156. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

157. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

158. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

159. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

160. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

161. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

162. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

163. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

164. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

165. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

166. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

167. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

168. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

169. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

170. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

171. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

172. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

173. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

174. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

175. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

176. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

177. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

178. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

179. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

180. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

181. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

182. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

183. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

184. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

185. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

186. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

187. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

188. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

189. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

190. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

191. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

192. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

193. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

194. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

195. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

196. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

197. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

198. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

199. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

200. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

201. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

202. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

203. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

204. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

205. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

206. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (2015).

207. Payton, A. et al. 
*PLoS Med.*
 
**12**
, e1001709 (201

<!-- PAGE 19 -->

Shapenet

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41525-021-00160-6

17. LoHaus, M., Kleindessner, M., Kerthapakorn, K., Locatello, F., & Russel, C. Are two heads the same or something disparate treatment in far neural networks. In 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2022).

18. McCarty, C. A., et al. The emerge network: a consortium of genomic and clinical data for present and future. 
*Genet. Med.*
 
**15**
, 761–771 (2013).

19. Gottesman, G. et al. The electronic medical records and genomics (emerg) network: present and future. 
*Genet. Med.*
 
**15**
, 761–771 (2013).

20. Duncan, G. et al. Analysis of polygenic risk score usage and performance in diverse human populations. 
*Nat. Commun.*
 
**10**
, 3338 (2019).

21. Lamm, C. et al. Comparative genetic architectures of schizophrenia in East Asian and European populations. 
*Nat. Genet.*
 
**51**
, 1670–1678 (2019).

22. Martin, A. R. et al. Clinical use of current polygenic risk scores may exacerbate health disparities. 
*Nat. Genet.*
 
**58**
, 584–591 (2016).

23. Marra, A. K. et al. Genetic misdiagnoses and the potential for misclassification. 
*N. Engl. J. Med.*
 
**375**
, 1850–1856 (2016).

24. Dehkeshgarian, T. et al. Biased data, biased AI: deep networks predict the acquisition site of TCSA images. 
*Diagn. Pathol.*
 
**18**
, 1–22 (2023).

25. Gann, Y. & Lemley, T. Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation. In 
*Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.*
 (2019), 1190–1198 (2019).

26. Shaban, M. I., Baur, C., Neveu, N. & Albarqouni, S. ScanGAN: stain style transfer for digital histological images. In 
*2019 IEEE 16th Symp. Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2019)*
 953–956 (IEEE, 2019).

27. Wulff, C. & Kubat, M. Learning in the presence of concept drift and hidden contexts. 
*Mach. Learn.*
 
**23**
, 69–109 (1996).

28. Schölkopf, B. & Czanner, S. Incremental learning from noisy data. 
*Mach. Learn.*
 
**1**
, 371–384 (1986).

29. Liu, L. et al. Learning under concept drift: a review. 
*IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.*
 
**23**
, 2346–2362 (2011).

30. Guo, L. L. et al. Systematic review of approaches to preserve medical learning performance in the presence of temporal data shift in clinical medicine. 
*Appl. Clin. Inform.*
 
**12**
, 308–315 (2021).

31. Woldesc, S. et al. Designing disaggregated evaluations of AI systems: choices, considerations, and tradeoffs. In 
*Proc. 2021 ACM Conf. Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency*
 (2021).

32. Zhou, H., Chen, Y. & Lipton, Z. C. Evaluating model performance in medical datasets over time. In 
*Proc. Conf. Health, Inference, and Learning*
 (2023).

33. Schölkopf, B. et al. On causal and anticausal learning. In 
*Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.*
 (2002).

34. Lipton, Z., Wang, Y. X. & Smola, A. Detecting and correcting for label shift with black box predictors. In 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 3322–3330 (PMLR, 2018).

35. Loupi, A., Mengel, M. & Haas, M. Thirty years of the international harmonization for allergic rhinitis: the past, present, and future of kidney transplant diagnostics. 
*Kidney Int.*
 
**101**
, 678–689 (2022).

36. Baccaredda, B. et al. Gleason and Fuhrman no longer make the grade. 
*Histopathology*
 
**68**
, 475–481 (2016).

37. Devlin, J. et al. The impact of deep learning classification on Behcet’s disease. 
*Int. J. Rheum. Dis.*
 
**19**
, 584–605 (2015).

38. Louis, D. N. et al. The 2016 World Health Organization classification of tumours of the central nervous system: a summary. 
*Acta Neuropathol.*
 
**131**
, 833–893 (2016).

39. Chou, A. & Coudrid, R. Learning to change things: data with adaptive windowing. In 
*Proc. 2007 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining*
 443–448 (SIAM, 2007).

40. Nigenda, D. et al. Amazon SageMaker Model Monitor is a system for real-time insights into deployed machine learning models. In 
*Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining*
 (2020).

41. Miroshnikov, A., Kotsopoulos, K., Frank, R. & Kannan, A. R. Weights and biases for fair and transparent machine learning models: machine learning models. 
*Mach. Learn.*
 
**131**
, 3307–3337 (2022).

42. Board, E. A. AAA statement on race. 
*Am. Anthropol.*
 
**100**
, 712–713 (1998).

43. On-Chian, A., Mivura, Y., Banda, Y., Thornton, T. A. & Sibro, J. Embracing genetic diversity to improve Black health. 
*N. Engl. J. Med.*
 
**384**
, 1853–1867 (2021).

44. Calhoun, A. The pathophysiology of racial disparities. 
*N. Engl. J. Med.*
 
**384**
, 270–271 (2021).

45. Sun, R. et al. Don’t ignore genetic data from minority populations. 
*Nature*
 
**585**
, 184–186 (2022).

46. Larivier, D. R. et al. Influence of socioeconomic and cultural factors on racial differences in late-stage presentation of breast cancer. 
*JAMA*
 
**279**
, 1820–1827 (1998).

47. Bao, M. H. et al. Incidence of breast cancer in a messy relationship between RAI datasets and algorithmic fairness benchmarks. In 
*35th Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks*
 (2021).

48. Han, M. et al. Efficient and privacy-enhanced federated learning for industrial intelligent manufacturing. 
*IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf.*
 
**16**
, 6532–6542 (2020).

49. Yang, G., Liu, Y., Chen, T. & Tong, Y. Federated machine learning: concept and applications. 
*ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol.*
 
**10**
, 1–39 (2019).

50. Bocwitz, K. et al. Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving machine learning. In 
*Proc. 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Computer and Communications Security*
 1715–1730 (IEEE, 2017).

51. Bonawit, K. et al. Towards federated learning of scale system design. In 
*Proc. Mach. Learn. Syst.*
 1, 374–388 (2019).

52. Liu, L. et al. Federated learning and predictive models for federated electronic health records. 
*Int. J. Med. Inform.*
 
**12**
, 56–67 (2020).

53. Huang, L. et al. Patient clustering improves efficiency of federated machine learning to predict mortality and hospital stay time using distributed electronic medical records. 
*J. Biomed. Inform.*
 
**99**
, 103291 (2019).

54. Liu, L. et al. Federated learning for healthcare informatics. 
*J. Healthc. Inf. Res.*
 
**5**
, 1–19 (2019).

55. Chakroborty, S., Patel, R. K. & Rayyag, A. Beyond federated learning: federated transfer learning for medical imaging algorithms trained from different device types. 
*Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.*
 
**62**
, 25–35 (2021).

56. Ju, C. et al. Federated transfer learning for EEG signal classification. In 
*42nd Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society*
 3040–3043 (IEEE, 2020).

57. Li, W. et al. Privacy-preserving federated brain tumour segmentation using federated machine learning in Medical Imaging 133–141 (Springer, 2019).

58. Katsis, G. et al. End-to-end privacy preserving deep learning on multi-institutional medical imaging data. 
*Nat. Mach. Intell.*
 
**2**
, 424–434 (2020).

59. Halle, M. et al. The future of digital health with federated learning. 
*NPJ Digit. Med.*
 
**3**
, 19 (2020).

60. Sheller, M. J. et al. Federated learning in medicine: facilitating multi-institutional collaborative research while sharing patient data. 
*Sci. Rep.*
 
**10**
, 17598 (2020).

61. Chou, A. et al. A potential privacy-enabled federated learning for sensitive health data. In 
*Machine Learning for Health (ML4H) Workshop at NeurIPS*
 (2019).

<!-- PAGE 20 -->

Kushida, C. A., et al. Strategies for de-identification and anonymization of electronic health record data for use in multicenter research studies. 
*Med. Care*
 50, SBC-5101 (2012).

van der Waak, M. et al. Data anonymization and protection in cross-institutional electronic patient records. 
*J. Int. Med. Inform.*
 70, 117–123 (2003).

Veale, M., & Binn, R. Fairer machine learning in the real world: mitigating discrimination without collecting sensitive data. 
*Big Data Soc.*
 4, 2053953917743550 (2017).

Fiume, M. et al. Federated discovery and sharing of genomic data using a federated, Net-BioMed approach. 
*Bioinformatics*
 32, 1646–1653 (2016).

Sadilek, A. et al. Privacy-first health research with federated learning. 
*NPJ Digit. Med.*
 4, 132 (2021).

Duan, R., & Boland, M. R. et al. A Chen, Y. QDAL: a one-shot distributed algorithm to perform logistic regressions on electronic health records data from multiple clinical sites. In 
*BCOMP/UTING 2019: Proc. Pacific Symposium 30–41 World Scientific*
, (2019).

Barros, M. V. et al. Federated learning improves site performance in multicenter deep learning without data sharing. 
*J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc.*
 28, 1259–1264 (2021).

Silva, S. et al. Federated learning in distributed medical data: a systematic meta-analysis of large-scale subcortical brain data. In 
*2019 IEEE 16th International Conference on BioMedical Imaging 270–274*
, IEEE (2019).

Roy, A., & Medvedev, S., Polster, S., Nevala, B. & Wachinger, C. BrainTorrent: a peer-to-peer environment for decentralized federated learning. Preprint at 
[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv:1905.06371](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv:1905.06371)
 (2019).

Lu, M. Y. et al. Federated learning for computational pathology: a complete whole slide image pipeline. 
*Med. Image Anal.*
 70, 102229 (2022).

Dou, D. et al. Federated deep learning for detecting COVID-19 lung abnormalities in CT: a privacy-preserving multinational validation study. 
*NPJ Digit. Med.*
 4, 460 (2021).

Dou, D. et al. Federated learning for detecting COVID-19 region segmentation in chest CT using multinational data from China, Italy, Japan. 
*Med. Image Anal.*
 70, 101982 (2021).

Vaid, A. et al. Federated learning of electronic health records to improve mortality prediction in hospitalized patients with COVID-19: machine learning approach. 
*JMIR Med. Inform.*
 9, e16420 (2021).

Li, S. S., Cai, T., & Duan, R. Targeting underrepresented population in precision medicine: a federated transfer learning approach. In 
*2021 11th Int. Conf. on Data Mining and Computing (ICDM 2021)*
, 1–7 (2021).

Marand, K. D. et al. The genomics research and innovation network: creating an interoperable federated, genomics learning system. 
*Genet. Med.*
 22, 391–398 (2020).

Cai, M. et al. A unified framework for cross-population trait prediction by leveraging the population correlation of polygenic traits. 
*Am. J. Hum. Genet.*
 108, 632–655 (2021).

Litjens, G. et al. Deep learning in medical image analysis: a source data† Source hypothesis transfer for unsupervised domain adaptation. In 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning 6028–6039*
 (PMLR, 2020).

Song, L., Ma, C., Zhang, G., & Zhang, Y. Privacy-preserving unsupervised domain adaptation in federated setting. 
*IEEE Access*
 8, 143233–143240 (2020).

Li, L. et al. Multi-site fMRI analysis using privacy-preserving cross-domain learning and domain adapter. 
*ALIFE: results in Image Anal.*
 10, 101765 (2020).

Peckham, A., Karani, P., & Maitra, S. V. J. Private federated learning with domain adaptation. In 
*Federated Learning for Data Privacy and Confidentiality Workshop in NeurIPS*
 (2019).

238. Peng, X., Huang, Z., Zhu, Y., & Samsel, K. Federated adversarial domain adaptation. In 
*Int. Conf. Learning Representations*
 (2020).

239. Yao, C. et al. Federated multi-target domain adaptation. In 
*Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision 1432–1443*
 (2022).

240. Li, L., Tejada, J., & Samsel, K. & Smith, V. Fair resource allocation in federated learning. In 
*Int. Conf. Learning Representations*
 (2020).

241. Mohri, M., Sivek, & & Suresh, A. T. Agnostic federated learning. In 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning Proceedings*
 (PMLR, 2020).

242. Ezzedine, Y. H., Yan, S., He, C., Ferrara, E. & Avestimehr, S. FairFed: enabling group fairness in federated learning. In 
*Proc. AAAI Artificial Intelligence*
 (2022).

243. Pascioli, A., Martinez, N., Berram, M., Sapiro, G., & Rodrigues, M. Minimax demographic group fairness in federated learning. In 
*ACM Conf. Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 142–159*
 (2021).

244. Chen, D., Gao, D., Kuang, W., Li, Y., & Ding, B. F. Bench: a comprehensive benchmark for personalized federated learning. 
*2020 Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems Data and Benchmarks Track*
 (2022).

245. Jiang, M. et al. Self-supervised fair representation learning without demographics. In 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2022).

246. Jiang, M. et al. Federated medical image segmentation via client contribution estimation. In 
*Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 12332–12341*
 (2022).

247. Jiang, M., Wang, Z., & Dou, D. O. Harmful: harmonizing local and global cliffs in federated learning on heterogeneous medical images. In 
*Proc. AAAI Artificial Intelligence 1037–1045*
 (2022).

248. Xu, Y., Li, P., Cui, S., & Wang, Y. C. F. Bias-eliminating augmentation learning for debiased federated learning. In 
*Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 20442–20452*
 (2023).

249. Zhou, Y. et al. Federated learning with non-iid data. Preprint at 
[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv:2304.02743](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv:2304.02743)
 (2023).

250. Konči, J. et al. Federated learning: strategies for improving communication-efficiency. Preprint at 
[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv:1610.05432 (2016).](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv:1610.05432)

251. Lin, Y., Han, S., Mao, H., Wang, Y. & Buly, W. V. Deep gradient compression: reducing communication by adaptive gradient clipping in distributed training. In 
*Int. Conf. Learning Representations 1719–1732*
 (PMLR, 2017).

252. Mokhtari, R. & O’Connor, D. Efficient federated learning of deep networks from non-iid data. In 
*Artificial Intelligence and Statistics 1721–1732*
 (PMLR, 2017).

253. Sattler, T., Feldmann, S., Malin, K. & Samsel, K. Robust and communication-efficient federated learning from non-iid data. In 
*IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.*
 33, 3040–3043 (2019).

254. Aouad, A. & Mitliagkas, I. Federated learning under communication constraints. In 
*Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 2022 10447–10456*
 (2022).

255. Wang, Y., Wang, Z., & Dou, D. O. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D. D.

<!-- PAGE 21 -->

265. Pogodin, R. et al. Efficient conditionally invariant representation learning. In: 
*Int. Conf. Learning Representations*
 (2023).

266. Loutz, C. et al. Causal effect inference with deep latent variable models. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2017).

267. Shu, C., Bie, J. & Veltkoff, V. Adapting neural networks for the estimation of treatment effects. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2019).

268. Yoon, J., Jordon, J. & Van Der Schaar, M. GANITE: estimation of individualized treatment effects using generative adversarial nets. In: 
*Int. Conf. Learning Representations*
 (2018).

269. Riedel, A., Fathony, R., Mané, E., Zitahart, B. & Jovanović, M. FAIR-Path adversarial instance re-weighting. In: 
*Neurocomputing*
 476, 1451–1468 (2021).

270. Jovanović, M., Balduzzi, D., Balduzzi, S., Deilhaut, B. & Jovanović, M. FAIR-Path adversarial instance re-weighting. In: 
*Neurocomputing*
 476, 1451–1468 (2021).

271. Sattinger, P., Hoffman, S. C., Chenthamarakshan, V. & Varshney, K. R. Fairness CAIG: generating data with fairness properties using a generative adversarial network. In: 
*Proc. Dev. 63.1–3.18*
 (2019).

272. Xu, D., Yuan, S., Zhang, L. & Wu, X. FAIRGAN: fairness-aware generative adversarial training. In: 
*Proc. IEEE International Conference on Big Data*
 570–575 (IEEE, 2018).

273. Xu, H., Xu, H., Li, Y., Jian, A. & Tang, J. To be robust or to be fair: adversarial fairness in adversarial training. In: 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 14402–14410 (PMLR, 2017).

274. Wiedemann, G., Wen, F. & Kepplinger, T. Achieving fairness through adversarial learning: an application to recidivism prediction. In: 
*FAT* Workshop*
 (2018).

275. Adeb, T., Valera, I., Ghahramani, Z. & Wellen, A. One-network adversarial fairness. In: 
*Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence*
 33, 2475–2482 (2019).

276. Madras, D., Creager, E., Pitassi, T. & Zemel, R. Learning adversarially fair and transferable representations. In: 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 3384–3393 (PMLR, 2018).

277. Madras, D., Creager, E., Pitassi, T. & Zemel, R. Learning adversarially fair and transferable representations. In: 
*Proc. 35th Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 (eds Dy, J. & Krause, A.) 3384–3393 (PMLR, 2018).

278. Chen, X., Fain, B., Lyu, L. & Mungala, K. Proportionally fair clustering. In: 
*Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 (eds Kudlur, K. & Sridharan, K.) 3799–3808 (ICML 2019) (PMLR, 2019).

279. Li, P., Zhao, H. & Liu, H. Deep fair clustering for visual learning. In: 
*Proc. 2021 Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition*
 9070–9079 (2021).

280. Hong, J. et al. Federated adversarial debiasing for fair and transferable representation learning. In: 
*Proc. 2021 ACM SIGKDD Conference Discovery and Data Mining*
 617–627 (2021).

281. Qi, X., Wang, Y. & Fu, H. Federated protected feature framework with contrastive adversarial learning. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2022).

282. Chen, Y., Balduzzi, R., Wang, J. & Liu, Y. Fairness transferability subject to bounded distribution shift. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2022).

283. An, B., Che, Z., Ding, M. & Huang, F. Transferring fairness under distribution shifts via fair consistency regularization. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2022).

284. Giguere, S. et al. Fairness guarantees under demographic shift. In: 
*Int. Conf. Learning Representations*
 (2022).

285. Schorff, J. et al. Diagnosing failures of fairness transfer across distribution shift in real-world medical settings. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2022).

286. Lipkova, J. et al. Personalized radiography design for glaucoma integration: a deep learning-based approach with multimodal scans, and Bayesian inference. In: 
*IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging*
 38, 1875–1884 (2019).

287. Chen, L. P. et al. Automatic detection of 39 fundus diseases and conditions in retinal photographs using deep neural networks. 
*Nat. Commun.*
 12, 4820 (2021).

288. Ostermyer, D., Wang, M. & Raghunathan, M. Graph-based skin lesion segmentation of multispectral dermatoscopic images. In: 
*IEEE Int. Conf. Image Processing*
 902–906 (2017).

289. Manica, A., Prugnolle, F. & Balloux, F. Geography is a better determinant of human genetic differentiation than ethnicity. 
*Kim, Gene*
 118, 166–176 (2007).

290. Hadad, N., Wolf, L. & Shafor, M. A two-step disentanglement method. In: 
*IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition*
 772–780 (2018).

291. Achille, A. & Soatto, S. Emergence of invariance and disentanglement in deep representations. 
*J. Mach. Learn. Res.*
 19, 1947–1980 (2018).

292. Chen, B., Li, T. L., Greene, R. & Duvenaud, D. Isolating sources of disentanglement in variational autoencoders. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2018).

293. Kim, H. & Mimik, A. Disentangling by factorizing. In: 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 2643–2658 (PMLR, 2018).

294. Higgins, I. et al. beta-VAE: learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational framework. In: 
*Int. Conf. Learning Representations*
 (2017).

295. Suter, M. H., Edman, A., Nivés, N. & Albarqouni, S. Learning interpretable disentangled representations using adversarial VAEs. In: 
*Domain Adaptation and Unsupervised Representation and Medical Image Learning with Less Labels and Imperfect Data*
 37–44 (Springer, 2019).

296. Gyawali, P. K. et al. Learning to disentangle inter-subject anatomical variations in electrocardiographic data. In: 
*IEEE Trans. Biomedical Engineering*
 65, 1766–1775 (2018).

297. Bing, S., Fortuin, V. & Ratcliff, G. On disentanglement in Gaussian process variational autoencoders. In: 
*4th Symp. Adv. Approximate Bayesian Inference*
 (2022).

298. Xu, Y., He, H., Shen, T. & Jaakkola, T. S. Controlling directions of disentanglement in disentangled feature aggregation. In: 
*NeuroPSyD*
 (2022).

299. Cai, M. & Koyejo, S. Fairness and representation learning. In: 
*NeurIPS Invited Talk*
 2019. 
[https://neurips.cc/2019/invited-talk-learning-representation-learning](https://neurips.cc/2019/invited-talk-learning-representation-learning)
 (NeurIPS Invited Talk, 2019).

300. Creager, E. et al. Flexibly fair representation learning by disentanglement. In: 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 14346–14345 (PMLR, 2019).

301. Locatello, F. et al. On the fairness of disentangled representations. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2020).

302. Lee, J., Kim, H., Lee, J., Lee, J. & Choo, J. Learning debiasing representations by disentangled feature aggregation. In: 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 34, 2023–25333 (2021).

303. Wang, Y. K., Wang, Q. W., Zhao, D. C. & Ye, H. Learning debiasing representations via conditional attribute interpolation. In: 
*Proc. IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition*
 7598–7608 (2023).

304. Tartaglione, E., Berberich, C. & Grangerbo, M. End entangling and disentangling deep neural networks for fair representation. In: 
*Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition*
 18058–18067 (2023).

305. Bercea, C. I., Wester, B., Rueckert, D. & Albarqouni, S. FedDis: disentangled federated learning for unsupervised brain pathology segmentation. 
*Front. Neurosci.*
 17, 1048550 (2023). 
[https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2023.1048550](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2023.1048550)
.

306. Chen, J., Shen, Y. & Yu, S. On fair normalization in histology web federated learning. In: 
*IEEE 18th Int. Symp. Biomedical Imaging*
 953–956 (IEEE, 2021).

<!-- PAGE 22 -->

Perspective

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01050-6

300.Pfeil, S. R., Da, I. & M. E. Heller, K. Federated and differentially private learning for electronic health records. In 
*Machine Learning for Health (ML4H) Workshop at NeurIPS*
 (2019).

Xu, H. & P. Powell, S. GAN-based Federated Learning: A systematic data generation based on federated learning. In 
*2020 IEEE Int. Conf. on Big Data and Signal Processing (BDSIP 2020)*
 (2020).

Razotte, J. F. et al. Reducing bias and increasing utility by federated generative modeling of medical images using a federated adversary. In 
*Proc. of the International Conference on Social Web*
 78-84 (2021).

Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M. & Hinton, G. A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations. In 
*Conf. Machine Learning 5997-6007 (PMLR, 2020)*
.

Chen, K., Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A., Laptev, I. & Sivic, J. & Hengige, W. Designing clinically transferable artificial intelligence systems for high-dimensional medical imaging. In 
*Med. Netw. 3, 929–935*
 (2021).

Jacov, A., Marasović, A., Miller, T. & Goldberger, Y. Formalizing trust in artificial intelligence: causes and goals of human trust in AI. In 
*Proc. 2021 ACM Conf. Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT 2021)*
 (2021).

Fiorilli, L. Establishing the rules for building trustworthiness. In 
*Med. Netw. 3, 654–658*
 (2021).

77. High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence. Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI (European Commission, 2019).

Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A. & Zisserman, A. Deep inside convolutional networks: visualising image classification models and saliency maps. In 
*Workshop at Int. Conf. Learning Representations*
 (2014).

Selvanayak, R. R. et al. Grad-CAM: visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization. In 
*Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision 618–626*
 (2017).

Iviv, J. et al. Grad-CAM++: A learned saliency map approach for visual explanations in deep neural networks. In 
*Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence 33, 590–597*
 (2018).

Seyyedi, M. et al. Using a deep learning algorithm and integrated gradients explanation to assist grading for diabetic retinopathy. 
*Ophthalmology 126, 552–560*
 (2019).

Pato, B. N., Lunavich, M., Patel, S. & Namboodiri, V. P. U-CAM: visual explanation using uncertainty based class activation maps. In 
*IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Visual/Pattern Recognition 746–753*
 (2019).

Grewal, M., Srivastava, M. M., Kumar, P. & Varadarajan, S. RADNET: medical level accuracy deep learning for mammography detection in CT scans. In 
*2018 IEEE 15th Int. Symp. Biomedical Imaging 281–284*
 (IEEE, 2018).

78. Schlemper, J. et al. Assessment of validity of saliency maps for abnormality localization in medical imaging. In 
*Medical Imaging with Deep Learning*
 (2020).

Schlemper, J. et al. Attention-guided networks for improving ultrasound scan plane detection. In 
*Medical Imaging with Deep Learning*
 (2020).

Schlemper, J. et al. Attention-guided networks: learning to leverage saliency regions in medical images. 
*Med. Image Anal. 53, 1017–207*
 (2019).

Mittelman, B., Russell, C. & Wachter, S. Explaining explanations: interpretations of black-box predictions, and the transparency trap. 
*288–298*
 (2019).

Struyf, J. P. et al. Is Explainable AI Interpreting, Explaining, and Visualizing Deep Learning 267–280 (Springer, 2019).

Kaur, H. et al. Interpreting interpretability: understanding data scientist’s use of interpretability techniques in machine learning. In 
*Proc. 2020 CHI Conf. Human Factors in Computing Systems*
 (2020).

79. Adebayo, J. et al. Sanity checks for saliency maps. In 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2018).

321. Saporta, A. et al. Benchmarking saliency methods for chest X-ray interpretation. 
*Net. Med. 1, 467–478*
 (2021).

Chen, K. J. et al. Pan-cancer integrative histology genomics analysis reveals a novel subtype of lung adenocarcinoma. 
*Cell 180, 865–878*
 (2020).

322. Adebayo, A. J., Janizek, J. D. & S. M. S. et al. for radiographic COVID-19 detection selects shortcuts over signal. 
*Net. Med. 1, 610–618*
 (2021).

323. Adebayo, J., Muelly, M., Vargas, J. & Karl, I. K. Bm. Debugging tests for model explanations. In 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems 34, 200–210*
 (2021).

Lee, M. & K. Rich, K. Who is included in human perceptions of AI? Trust and perceived fairness around healthcare AI and cultural mismatch. In 
*Proc. 2021 CHI Conf. Human Factors in Computing Systems*
 (2021).

80. Anderson, M., Talay, A. & Yan, Q. Anatomic attribution for deep networks. In 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning 3319–3328 (PMLR, 2017)*
.

Lundberg, S. M. & Lee, S. I. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. 
*Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems 2488–2497*
 (2017).

81. Shapley, L. A value for n-person games. 
*Q. J. Econ. 67, 29–43*
 (1953).

82. Lundberg, S. M. & Lee, S. I. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. 
*Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems 2488–2497*
 (2017).

Kim, G. S., Cho, Y. & Park, S. Interpretable Deep Learning: a deep learning-based tool for the prediction of transcription factors. 
*Front. Netw. Med. Sci. 104*
 (2019).

83. Lundberg, S. M. et al. Explainable machine-learning predictions in healthcare. 
*Nature 590, 64–68*
 (2020).

84. Lundberg, S. M. et al. Explainable machine-learning predictions in healthcare. 
*Nature 590, 64–68*
 (2020).

85. Wu, Q. et al. Interpretable machine learning prediction of all-cause mortality. 
*Gerontol. Geriatr. 2, 105–110*
 (2021).

Janiw, J. D. et al. Uncovering expression signatures of synergistic drug response using ensembles of explainable neural networks. 
*Net. Med. 1, 1033–1043*
 (2021).

86. Shapley, L. A value for n-person games. 
*Q. J. Econ. 67, 29–43*
 (1953).

87. Probst, M. Models for fairness with the What-if tool and Shapley values on tabular data. In 
*Proc. 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 705*
 (2020).

Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

88. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

89. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

90. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

91. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

92. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

93. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

94. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

95. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

96. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

97. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

98. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

99. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

100. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

101. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

102. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

103. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

104. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

105. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

106. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

107. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

108. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

109. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

110. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

111. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

112. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

113. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

114. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

115. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

116. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

117. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine Learning 1033–1043*
 (2017).

118. Lundberg, S. M. Explaining quantitative measures of fairness. In 
*Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Machine*

<!-- PAGE 23 -->

**Perspective**

[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01056-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01056-8)

342 Ghorbani, A. & Zou, J. Data Shapley: equitable valuation of data for machine learning. In 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 97, 2242–2251 (2019).

343 Pang, C. D., Felland, P., Thielens, S. & Sunyaev, A. Trustworthy machine learning for health care: scalable data valuation with differential privacy. In 
*Proc. Conf. Health, Internet, and Learning*
 47–57 (2022).

344 Prakash, E. I., Shrikumar, A. & Kundaje, A. Towards more realistic simulated datasets for benchmarking deep learning models in regulatory genomics. In 
*Machine Learning in Computational Biology*
 1–12 (2022).

345 Okityo, O. et al. Attention U-Net: learning where to look for the pancreas. In 
*Medical Imaging with Deep Learning*
 (2018).

346 Dong, Y. et al. An attention-based U-Net for medical image transformers for image recognition at scale. In 
*Int. Conf. Learning Representations*
 (2020).

347 Lu, M. Y. Data-efficient and weakly supervised computational pathology on whole-slide images. 
*Nat. Biomed. Eng.*
 5, 855–570 (2021).

348 Yufei, C. et al. Bayes-MIL: a new probabilistic perspective on attention-based multi-patch classification for whole-slide images. In 
*Int. Conf. Neural Representations*
 (2023).

349 Van Candebeke, W., Vandenhende, S., Georgoulis, S. & Van de Ven, S. Weakly-supervised learning for histopathology using object-mask proposals. In 
*Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Computer Vision*
 10302–10312 (2021).

350 Radford, A. et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In 
*Int. Conf. Machine Learning*
 8748–8763 (2021).

351 Wei, J. et al. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2022).

352 Jernite, Y., Juyol, D., Padhiya, H., Taylor-Reiner, A. & Hu, L. AdditiveMIL: intrinsically interpretable multiple instance learning for pathology. In 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 (2022).

353 Dao, J. A. et al. Human-interpretable image features derived from densely mapped cancer pathology slides predict diverse molecular phenotypes. 
*Nat. Commun.*
 12, 1613 (2021).

354 Bhargava, H. K. Computationally derived image signature of strong morphologic prognostic value in prostate cancer recurrence following prostatectomy in African american patients. 
*Clin. Cancer Res.*
 19, 3915–3923 (2013).

355 Curtis, J. R. et al. Population-based fracture risk assessment and osteoporotic treatment disparities by race and gender. 
*J. Gen. Intern. Med.*
 24, 956–962 (2009).

356 Liu, L. et al. An integrated TCGA pan-cancer clinical data resource to facilitate quality survival outcome analytics. 
*Cell*
 173, 400–416 (2018).

357 Foley, R. N., Wang, C. & Collins, A. J. Cardiovascular risk factor prediction and kidney function estimation: the US general population. 
*The NHANES II study*
. In 
*Mayo Clinic Proc.*
 80, 1270–1277 (Elsevier, 2005).

358 Neveu, M., Folsom, A. & Lester, G. The osteoarthritis initiative. Protocol for the cohort study. 
[https://nda.nih.gov/studies/doi](https://nda.nih.gov/studies/doi)
 (2005).

359 Vaught, I. A., Terry, E. L., Bartley, E. J., Schaefer, N. & Fillinger, R. Baseline differences in clinical outcomes, pain and disability: a meta-analysis. 
*J. Pain*
 20, 629–644 (2019).

360 Rotemberg, V. et al. A patient-centric dataset of images and reports for identifying radiologist-drawn clinical context. In 
*NeurIPS*
 3, 34 (2022).

361 Srinivasan, S. et al. Estimating skin tone and effects on classification performance in dermatology datasets. Preprint at 
[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1911.03038](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1911.03038)
 (2019).

362 Kinyanjui, N. M. et al. Fairness of classifiers across skin tones in dermatology. In 
*Int. Conf. Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention*
 320–329 (2020).

363 Chiew, E. Y. et al. The Age-Disparity-Disorder (ADD) dataset: a study design and baseline characteristics (ARSDS2 report number 47484894919). 
*BMJ*
 370, m2622 (2021).

364 Joshi, N. & Burlina, P. A. fairness via domain adaptation. Preprint at 
[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2104.10709](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2104.10709)
 (2021).

365 Yoo, Y. et al. Fairness-aware deep learning performance and fairness for multi-modal pulmonary embolism detection from CT and ECG. Preprint at 
[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2111.17165](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2111.17165)
 (2021).

366 Edwards, N. J. et al. The DPTAC data portal: a resource for cancer proteomics research. 
*J. Proteome Res.*
 14, 2707–2713 (2015).

367 Johnson, A. E. et al. MIMIC-III: a freely accessible critical care database. 
*Sci. Data*
 1, e0025 (2014).

368 Bong, W., Suresh, H., Celi, L. A., Szolovits, P. & Chassemi, M. Racial disparities and mental in end-of-life care. In 
*Machine Learning for Healthcare Conf.*
 587–602 (2021).

369 Protopop, A. E. et al. Association of inclusion of more black individuals in lung cancer screening with reduced radiology. 
*JAMA Netw. Open.*
 4, e2119629 (2021).

370 National Lung Screening Trial Research Team et al. The National Lung Screening Trial: overall design and findings. 
*N. Engl. J. Med.*
 358, 2432–2451 (2008).

371 Cakir, E. et al. An RSNA pulmonary embolism CT dataset. 
*Radiol. Artif. Intell.*
 3, e205254 (2021).

372 Gerlach, A., Zhang, A., Sayre, J., Popescu-Kuricova, S. & Huang, H. Bone age assessment of children using a digital hand atlas. 
*Comput. Med. Imaging Graph.*
 38, 322–331 (2014).

373 Jeng, J. L. et al. The Mayo Clinic imaging database (MIMIC): a racially diverse, granular dataset of 3.4 million screening and diagnostic mammographic images. 
*Radiol. Artif. Intell.*
 3, e202044 (2021).

374 Pollard, T. J. et al. The eICU collaborative research database: a freely available multi-institutional dataset of critical care data. 
*Sci. Data*
 5, 1–13 (2018).

375 Shrivastava, S., Balaraman, V. & Gamanu, V. Benchmarking machine learning models on multicentre eICU critical care dataset. 
*PLoS ONE*
 15, e0235424 (2020).

376 Kermany, K. et al. The Mayo Clinic dataset for open health data: the case of the heritage health prize claims dataset. 
*J. Med. Internet Res.*
 22, e323 (2020).

377 Madras, D., Pissati, T. & Zemel, R. Predict responsibly: improving fairness and accuracy by learning to defer. In 
*Adv. Neural Information Processing Systems*
 10, 1–12 (2020).

378 Louizos, C., Swersky, K. L. Y., Welling, M. & Zemel, R. The variational free supercalibrator. In 
*Int. Conf. Learning Representations*
 (2016).

379 Raff, E. & Sylverstet, J. Gradient reversal against discrimination. Preprint at 
[https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1807.00378](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1807.00378)
 (2018).

380 Smith, J. W., Everhart, J., Dickson, W., Knowler, W. & Johannes, R. Using the ADAP classifier to forecast diabetes mellitus from medical mellitus. In 
*Proc. Symp. Computer Applications in Medical Care*
 261–265 (1988).

381 Samsa, S. et al. Data augmentation for discrimination prevention and bias disambiguation. In 
*Proc. AAAI/ACM Conf. on Ethics and Fairness in AI*
 354–364 (2020). 
[https://doi.org/10.1145/3358202.3358202](https://doi.org/10.1145/3358202.3358202)
.

382 International Warfarin Pharmacogenomics Consortium. Pharmacogenetic prediction of warfarin dose. 
*N. Engl. J. Med.*
 358, 999–1008 (2008).

383 Kallus, N., Mao, X. & Zhou, Y. Assessing algorithmic fairness with unobserved protected attributes using data-masking. In 
*Proc. 2020 Conf. Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency*
 19 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2020).

<!-- PAGE 24 -->

**Competing interests**

The authors declare no competing interests.

**Additional information**

**Supplementary information**
 The online version contains supplementary material available at 
[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01056-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01056-8)
.

**Correspondence**
 should be addressed to Faishal Mahmood.

**Peer review information**
 Nature Biomedical Engineering thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work.

**Reprints and permissions**
 information is available at 
[www.nature.com/reprints](http://www.nature.com/reprints)
.

**Publisher's note**
 Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s), author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.

© Springer Nature Limited 2023