<!-- Page 1 -->

MAYO CLINIC

DIGITAL HEALTH
MAYO CLINIC PROCEEDINGS:

DIGITAL HEALTH
COMMENTARY

# Unbiased Artificial Intelligence: Addressing Bias in Computational Pathology

Diana Montezuma, MD, PhD; Rouven Porz, PhD; David Ameisen, PhD; Vincenzo L'Imperio, MD; Mircea-Sebastian Serbanescu, MD, PhD; Jordi Temprana-Salvador, MD; Norman Zerbe, PhD; Nadieh Khalili, PhD; and Inti Zlobec, PhD; on behalf of the European Society of Digital and Integrative Pathology (ESDIP)

"People generally see what they look for, and hear what they listen for [...]"

Harper Lee, To Kill a Mockingbird, our perspective, as individuals, is often shaped by our own biases and preconceived notions. Likewise, artificial intelligence (AI) models are shaped by the data they are trained on, inheriting the patterns and biases present within it. Just as human perception is influenced by experience, these models learn from a limited subset of the world, often failing to generalize beyond it. Computational pathology (CPath) is an evolving discipline at the intersection of pathology and computational sciences, encompassing the application of AI to the analysis of pathology images.1 As in other domains of medical imaging, such as radiology and dermatology, CPath is also susceptible to bias, defined, in the context of health care AI, as the systematic or unfair variations in model predictions across different patient populations that may lead to unequal care.2 In the near future, we will increasingly use algorithms in pathology, which, if implemented without oversight, may misinterpret, perpetuate, or amplify, existing biases. These applications could then be discriminatory and jeopardize the fair diagnosis and treatment of patients. One might object that biases are entirely human, indeed genuinely human because we are always—consciously, but more often unconsciously—biased through our experiences and prejudices toward others.3 However, machine learning models should be objective and generalizable, enabling conclusions that are applicable across diverse contexts. Herein we define bias within the specific context of CPath,

provide a concise overview of recent original findings on bias in CPath and make the case for the need for further research in this specific field. Finally, as the European Society of Digital and Integrative Pathology, we propose a comprehensive approach to unbias AI in pathology.

## What is Bias in CPath?

Bias in CPath can occur in subtle ways, although pathology images may not overtly display characteristics associated with specific demographic characteristic groups, the data used to train AI models can still contain underlying biases. Bias, in this sense, refers to systematic unfair preferences within AI systems, potentially resulting in discriminatory outcomes.4 Computational biases in pathology have been broadly categorized into 3 types, according to the source of bias: data bias, development bias, and interaction bias.5 While a detailed description of the multiple types of CPath biases is beyond this commentary's scope (see [H]), some concepts are important to highlight. Data biases occur when the dataset(s) used to train a CPath model are not diverse, causing the model to favor the majority subgroup, performing less accurately on underrepresented populations. Recently, Vaidya and colleagues reported unequal model performance across demographic characteristic groups using pathology images.6 This was based on data from institution-specific information linked to the images but irrelevant for diagnosis, resulting in misleading associations (institution-specific bias).6,7 This was even highlighted in benchmarking of foundation models (FMs) trained

from the European Society of Digital and Integrative Pathology (ESDIP), Lisboa, Portugal (DM, CA, VLL, M.S.S., J.T.S., N.Z., NK, I.Z.); Research & Development Unit: IMP Diagnostics, Portugal (DM); Cancer Biology and Epigenetics Group, Research Center of IPO Porto (CI-IPOP), Portugal (DM); Portugalaise Oncology Institute of Porto, Comprehensive Cancer Center Regional Seneca (Porto-CCC) & CI-IPOP-ESDIP (Health Research Network); Portugal (DM); Medical Ethics and Continuing Medical Education, Inset Group, Insetpital, University Hospital of Bern, Bern, Switzerland (RP); mginit SAS, Paris, France (D.A.); School of Medicine, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy (VLL); Department of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS San Gerardo dei Tiri, Monza, Italy (VLL); Department of Medical Informatics and Biostatistics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, Romania (M.S.S.); Pathology Departments, Vall Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain (J.); Charité Berlin-Brandenburg, Berlin, Germany (J.); Universität zu Berlin, Institute of Medical Informatics, Berlin, Germany (J.); Department of Pathology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The

Affiliations continued at the end of this article.

Mayo Clinic Digital Health. © December 2024;34:100023. © 2025 The AUTHORS. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. This is an open

Mayo Clinic Digital Health. © 2025 The AUTHORS. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. This is an open access article under the CC-BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

1

---

<!-- Page 2 -->

MAYO CLINIC PROCEEDINGS: DIGITAL HEALTH

on data from multiple institutes.6 Additionally, development biases can emerge during the models' design process where algorithmic choices or training practices may favor certain patterns over others, affecting the model's generalizability. Finally, interaction biases arise when users' pre-existing expectations or overreliance on AI output can unintentionally reinforce existing model biases (confirmation and automation bias, respectively).7,8 In essence, bias in CPath arises from various sources, and understanding these biases is essential for fair and reliable CPath.

### Bias and Generalization

In CPath, poor generalization is one of the most consequential and underappreciated sources of bias. No models developed on limited, often monocentric datasets that fail to reflect the heterogeneity of real-world populations. These models may show high performance upon internal validation but underperform on external data—a phenomenon known as distribution shift.9 This lack of generalizability is not a simple technical footnote, it is an underlying structural cause of bias. Models trained on data from predominantly high-income, majority-ethnic institutions will underperform on data from underrepresented or lower-resource populations, perpetuating health care disparities.10

The FMs promise to overcome these limitations by enabling a more sustainable feature learning and few-shot adaptation.7 Yet, emerging evidence shows that FMs, particularly trained in a self-supervised fashion, are still susceptible to biases.7,10 Without guidance from domain-relevant data, FMs risk learning representations that amplify existing biases rather than diminishing them.8 Critically, CPath still lacks benchmarking and stratified evaluation standards to assess generalization performance across institutions/demographic characteristic subgroups. This makes it difficult to quantify whether a model is truly fair or merely overfitting to its training cohort. Addressing this gap requires demographic and institutional stratification in evaluation protocols, multi-institutional benchmarks, and fairness-aware training strategies. The FMs should not be blindly trusted; rather, they must be stress-tested for equity.

### Why Address Bias in CPath?

In other medical domains, such as radiology, it is well-known that acknowledged that models can propagate existing biases in the data, causing performance inconsistencies between subgroups.12 Seyyed-Kalantari et al.11 have reported that chest X-ray classifiers systematically under-diagnose Black patients, which may result in delayed care. Similarly, Yang et al.13 reported systematic underdiagnosis of various pathologies in intersectional subgroups such as Black female patients. This is also true for other imaging techniques, such as magnetic resonance imaging and computer tomography scans, where AI models have exhibited diagnostic disparities across different demographic groups. However, this problem has not been largely explored in CPath, where similar biases can impact diagnostic accuracy and fairness. Vaidya et al.14 showed that state-of-the-art models can exhibit relevant performance disparities across racial and income-linked subgroups. A performance gap between Black and White patients was consistently reported across all tested tasks (3% for breast cancer subtyping, 10.9% for lung cancer subtyping, and 16.0% for mutation prediction in glioma cases). Moreover, they observed that the inequity extended to other demographic characteristic variables, such as median household income and age, with poorer performance in patients from low-income areas.15 Aside from this study, original research on demographic characteristic bias in CPath remains scarce, and most existing studies, albeit also limited, focus on other forms of bias, such as institutional and interaction biases. Recent studies have investigated the use of synthetic images to enhance generalizability in pathology tasks, while mitigating bias. Kerna et al.16 have investigated the degradation of Deep Learning systems' performance in pathology samples, and in chest X-ray and dermatology images. They showed that models trained on data from certain hospitals exhibited reduced accuracy when applied to data from other institutions and that using synthetic images led to improved accuracy and fairness in underrepresented groups.15 Van Booven et al.17 have also used synthetic data to improve Gleason grading accuracy in prostate cancer, reducing

2

Mayo Clin Proc Digital Health • December 2025;3(4):100902 • https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcpdig.2025.100902
www.mcpdighealth.org

---

<!-- Page 3 -->

UNBIASED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

Overcoming bias in CPath

Representative data

Diverse, multi-center datasets:Inclusion of underrepresented groups;Standard staining and scanning protocols;Improved access to sensitive attributes/metadata, while preserving privacy;Public access datasets.

Multidisciplinary approach

Collaboration between pathologists, ML experts/other researchers and ethicists;Regulation that balances privacy with the need for bias-auditable data in research;Patient involvement in research and consent processes;Transparency in reporting performance differences across distinct patient subgroups.

Computational strategies

A. Data-level techniques(balanced sampling data augmentation; synthetic data).

B. Bias-resistant model design(adversarial regularization; contrastive learning across subgroups; disentanglement; domain-invariant features; fairness-aware losses).

C. Benchmarking and bias evaluation metrics(subgroup-specific performance metric; prediction calibration; interpretability/explainability).

D. Federated learning(decentralized training with differential privacy; cross-site fairness optimization).

↓

Further original research addressing bias in CPath

FIGURE 1. Overcoming bias in computational pathology: a summary of suggested approaches.

bias in this setting. Just recently, Roshach et al.16 published the first study to report the existence of confirmation bias in the CPath domain. Addressing bias is not only important due to the possible unfairness, neglecting it can also lead to poorer models: recent investigations have shown that The Cancer Genome Atlas, one of the most widely used datasets in histopathology, may contain site-specific characteristics that may introduce spurious correlations. As such, CPath models can be relying on these site-specific features, rather than the underlying biological characteristics, leading to overoptimistic performance and ultimately compromising their clinical value.17,18 Aside from the above-mentioned studies, and a few other examples, such as,6–8,18–21 there persists a considerable gap of original research and comprehensive datasets addressing bias in CPath, namely on biases related to patient-level characteristics. This issue has also been highlighted by Hanna MG et al., who urged stakeholders to address bias in pathology data to build more inclusive and equitable AI systems.3 However, overcoming certain aspects of bias may require that more detailed patient-level information is collected, which could conflict with current research ethics standards. To truly understand

and mitigate bias, researchers need to be able to compare the data with metadata, such as i. e. race, ethnicity, age, and pre-existing conditions. However, these correlations are often not compatible with true anonymization of patient data. A rethink of the fundamental concepts is warranted and only achievable through more interdisciplinary cooperation, including experts in the field of research ethics.

## Overcoming Bias

Addressing bias in CPath demands a systematic, interdisciplinary effort. Paths to overcoming bias in CPath are typically categorized into 3 major categories (Figure 1): representative data, multidisciplinary approach and computational strategies, detailed below.

### Representative Data

Bias mitigation begins with multi-institutional datasets, to ensure the inclusion of data from potentially underrepresented groups.3 Having protocols for standardization of laboratory workflows (eg, tissue staining) would further reduce bias and enhance generalizability.3,18 Public datasets play an important role; however, many currently lack demographic characteristics data. Therefore, providing access to

Mayo Clin Proc Digital Health ■ December 2025/100032 ■ https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcpdig.2025.100032
www.mcpdigalhealth.org

3

---

<!-- Page 4 -->

MAYO CLINIC PROCEEDINGS: DIGITAL HEALTH

public datasets and importantly, to patient-level metadata, while preserving patient privacy, would allow for person-related potential biases to be considered early during model development stages. Additionally, while representative data can help mitigate bias, in many real-world scenarios, particularly across low-income and middle-income countries, access to diverse data can be limited. Domain generalization, which aims to improve model robustness to unseen data by learning domain-invariant representations during training) can be a useful strategy to promote equitable performance when certain populations are underrepresented.

### Multidisciplinary Approach

Gathering perspectives from multidisciplinary experts at all levels of the AI lifecycle reduces bias.22 Collaborative partnerships between pathologists, AI experts, researchers, as well as ethicists and policymakers should be encouraged. Regulations that balance the needs for data protection and data privacy with bias-auditable research must be established.

### Computational Strategies

A. Data-Level Techniques. Bias already begins at the dataset. Many CPath models are trained on monocentric datasets lacking diversity and perpetuating performance disparities. Corrective action involves balanced sampling, targeted data augmentation, and, in the absence of real-world diversity, synthetic data generation to fill the gaps.14

B. Bias-Resistant Model Design. Beyond data, models must be explicitly designed to resist bias. Adversarial regularization can suppress the encoding of sensitive attributes; contrastive learning across subgroups promotes shared representations that are not tied to demographic characteristic identifiers. Additional training techniques, which disentangle biologically relevant signals from confounders such as socioeconomic type or institutional metadata,52,53 Fairness-aware loss functions offer a principled way to optimize equity alongside accuracy.

C. Bias Evaluation Metrics and Post-Hoc Techniques. Benchmarking is a well-

established practice in AI12,13; however, to the best of our knowledge, there are currently no established benchmarks specifically designed to evaluate bias in CPath. The evaluation must go beyond aggregate metrics, as bias can remain undetected unless performance is stratified by subgroups, exposing disparities that affect real-world applicability. In segmentation, overlap-based metrics like the Dice Similarity Coefficient and Hausdorff distance measure how accurate region sizes differ by sex, identical errors yield lower Dice Similarity Coefficients for women. Thus, bias may stem not only from data or models but also from evaluation metrics themselves. Also, tools such as the Robustness Index54 can quantify model reliance on confounding versus biological features. Furthermore, explainability is crucial, helping to uncover the hidden patterns and to facilitate the understanding of AI decisions by clinicians.

D. Federated Learning and Collaborative Infrastructure. Federated learning (FL) enables an infrastructure for training AI models without centralizing data. It allows multiple centers to contribute while preserving patient privacy. Through decentralized training and techniques such as differential privacy, FL supports broad collaboration without exposing sensitive data, promoting more inclusive development pipelines.55 Nonetheless, current FL approaches often lack bias mitigation strategies. Common practices such as averaging model weights across sites can inadvertently propagate existing biases. Therefore, FL systems must be fairness-aware by design, explicitly monitoring performance across sites and demographic characteristic subgroups to avoid reinforcing the very disparities they aim to mitigate.

### Call to Action

Although this work focuses on specific dimensions of bias in CPath, other important issues (unequal access to CPath tools and data, lack of diverse datasets) also warrant attention. With this Commentary, we aim to make a call to action for greater awareness and original research on bias in the specific field of CPath. Addressing bias in CPath, which is already underway in other medical fields,14 is essential for developing AI models

4

Mayo Clin Proc Digital Health • December 2025;3(4):A100902 • https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcpdig.2025.100902
  www.mcpdigitalhealth.org

---

<!-- Page 5 -->

UNBIASED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

that provide clinically meaningful results across diverse populations. If left unchecked, bias can reinforce existing inequalities in health care, disproportionately affecting underrepresented groups.33 Only by making a collective effort, involving academia, industry, policymakers, and regulators, will we be able to unbind CFath and see beyond what we merely look for.

## POTENTIAL COMPETING INTEREST

The authors declare no competing interests related to this work. This work was conducted independently and was fully funded by the European Society of Digital and Integrative Pathology (ESDIP).

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We want to thank Sabine Leh for reviewing this paper. Drs Khalili and Zlobec contributed equally.

Affiliations and Acronyms: AI, artificial intelligence; CFath, computational pathology; FL, federated learning; FM, foundation model.

Affiliations (Continued from the first page of this article): Montzena (NK); and Institute of Tissue Medicine and Pathology (ITMP), University of Bern, Murtenstrasse, Switzerland (LZ).

Correspondence: Diana Montzena, MD, PhD, Research & Development Unit, IHP Diagnostik, Pracha do Bom Sucesso 61 sala 808, 4030-145 Porto, Portugal.

## ORCID

Diana Montzena: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9551-4589

## REFERENCES

1. Abeli E, Pantarowitz L, Aelfner F, et al. Computational pathology definitions, best practices, and recommendations for regulatory guidance: a white paper from the Digital Pathology Association.J Pathol. 2019;249(3):286-294.https://doi.org/10.1002/path.3331.
2. Huazhenli F, Josephson CB, Witters G, Adenewo D, Abzi Z, White JA. Bias recognition and mitigation strategies in artificial intelligence healthcare applications.Npj Digit Med. 2023;6(1):14.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-023-01507-7.
3. Fricker M. Epistemic injustice: power and the ethics of knowing. 1sted. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2009.
4. Hennig MCS, Pantarowitz L, Judson B, et al. Ethical and bias considerations in artificial intelligence medicine.J Med Res. 2023;38(3):10686.https://doi.org/10.1080/1746.0204.2023.2104986.
5. Vaidya A, Chen RJ, Willison DFK, et al. Demographic bias in misdiagnosis by computational pathology models.Nat Med. 2023;29(4):174-180.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-024-02885-z.

1. Astian BDigoli A, Rahmaman Y, Dehghanarian T, Grami A, Fatouh HR. Bias reduction in representation of histopathology images using deep feature selection.Sci Rep. 2022;12(1):19994.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-23172-z.
2. Lin W, Wu S, Zhu R, Wang L. Unveiling institution-specific bias in pathology foundation models: determinants, causes, and potential solutions.Preprint. Posted online February 24, 2025. 16889.https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2502.16889.
3. de Jong ED, Marcus E, Tenen J. Career pathology foundation models are unrobust to medical center differences.arXiv2021. 18055. Preprint. Posted online February 1, 2025.https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2501.18055.
4. Lloyd D, Coiera E. Automation bias and verification complexity: a systematic review.J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2012;19(2):423-431.https://doi.org/10.1093/ami/ahs015.
5. Mova R, Koh PW, Person E. Using unlabelled data to enhance fairness of medical AI.Nat Med. 2024;30(4):944-945.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-024-02929-4.
6. Seeyed Kalantari L, Zhang H, McDiarmid MBA, Chen YF, Ghazemi H. Underrepresentation of artificial intelligence algorithms applied to chest radiograph in under-served racial populations.Nat Med. 2021;27(12):2176-2182.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-02199-4.
7. Yang Y, Zhang H, Gohyo JWA, Katabi D, Ghazemi H. The limits of fair medical imaging: AI in real-world generalization.Nat Med. 2022;28(3):2028-2038.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-02431-3.
8. Yang Y, Liu Y, Liu X, et al. Demographic bias of expert-level vision-language foundation models in medical imaging.Sci Adv. 2021;7(11):eabe3005.https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abe3005.
9. Noma I, Wiles O, Alukubaree I, et al. Generative models improve fairness of medical classifiers under distribution shifts.Nat Med. 2024;30(4):1163-1171.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-024-02838-4.
10. Van Booven DJ, Chen CB, Kryverko ON, et al. Mitigating bias in prostate cancer diagnosis using synthetic data for improved AI-driven Gleason grading.Proc. Oncol. 2023;9(1):151.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41496-023-00933-5.
11. Robash C, Armingel J, Kolgel S, et al. When two wrongs don't make a right—examining confirmation bias and the role of time pressure during human-AI collaboration in computational pathology.arXiv2021. 10107.https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2110.10107.
12. Dehghanarian T, BDigoli AA, Rasistan A, et al. Biased data, biased AI: deep networks and the acquisition site of TCGA images.Diagn Pathol. 2023;18(7):67.https://doi.org/10.1186/s13002-023-01353-3.
13. Owen F, Rahmaman Y, Malekhi M, Astian BDigoli A. Investigation on potential bias factors in histopathology datasets.Sci Rep. 2025;15(1):11349.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87210-0.
14. Higgle M, Seeger P, Lipuschitz S, et al. Resolving challenges in deep learning-based analyses of histopathological images using explanation methods.Sci Rep. 2020;10(1):6423.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-62724-0.
15. Howard PA, Dakai S, Kocharyan S, et al. The impact of site-specific differences in histopathology on deep learning model accuracy and bias.Nat Commun. 2021;12(1):4233.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-02021-1.
16. Majeed T, Hopkin G, Wang K, et al. Anti-stigma interventions in low-income and middle-income countries: a systematic review.ECOSanMedicine. 2022;10:16212.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecosmed.2022.10.016.
17. Ferrer X, Nuñez T, Such J, Cote JM, Crudo N. Bias and discrimination in AI: A cross-disciplinary perspective.IEEE Technol Soc Mag. 2021;40(2):72-80.https://doi.org/10.1109/ITS.2021.3565293.

Maya Clin Prog Digital Health | December 2025;3(4):10002 | https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcpgid.2025.10002

5

---

<!-- Page 6 -->

MAYO CLINIC PROCEEDINGS: DIGITAL HEALTH

23. Chen RJ, Wang J, Williamson DFK, et al. Algorithmic fairness in artificial intelligence for medicine and healthcare. Nat Biomed Eng. 2023;7(7):719-742. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01056-8.

24. Karangirtis A, Umerson R, Sheller MJ, et al. Federated benchmarking of medical artificial intelligence with MedPerf. Nat Med. 2023;29(7):779-810. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-023-00652-2.

25. Noroni N, Hu Q, Aellen PM, Faraci FD, Tzavara A. Addressing bias in big data and AI for health care: A call for open science. Patterns (N Y). 2021;2(10):100347. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2021.100347.

6
Mayo Clin Proc Digital Health ■ December 2025;3(4):100302 ■ 
[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcpdig.2025.100302](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcpdig.2025.100302)

[www.mcpdigitalhealth.org](http://www.mcpdigitalhealth.org)