<!-- Page 1 -->

Machine Learning with Applications 7 (2023) 101918

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Machine Learning with Applications

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/mlwa

Self-supervised contrastive learning for digital histopathology

Ozan Ciga 
^a,*^
, Tony Xu 
^b,1^
, Anne Louise Martel 
^b,c,2^

^a^
 Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Canada

^b^
 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Canada

^c^
 Physical Sciences, Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, Canada

ARTICLE INFO

Keywords:

Self-supervised learning

Digital histopathology

Whole-slide images

Unsupervised learning

ABSTRACT

Unsupervised learning has been a long-standing goal of machine learning and is especially important for medical image analysis, where the learning can compensate for the scarcity of labeled datasets. A promising subclass of unsupervised learning is self-supervised learning, which aims to learn salient features using the raw input as the learning signal. In this work, we tackle the issue of learning domain-specific features without any supervision to improve multi-task performance that are of interest to the digital histopathology community. We apply a contrastive self-supervised learning method to digital histopathology by collecting and pretraining on 57 histopathology datasets without any labels. We find that combining multiple multi-organ datasets with different types of staining and resolution properties improves the quality of the learned features. Furthermore, we find using more images for pretraining leads to a better performance in multiple downstream tasks, albeit there are diminishing returns as more unlabeled images are incorporated into the pretraining. Linear classifiers trained on top of the learned features show that networks pretrained on digital histopathology datasets perform better than ImageNet pretrained networks, boosting task performances by more than 28% in F_1 scores on average. Interestingly, we did not observe a constant correlation between the pretraining dataset size or the organ versus the downstream task (e.g., pretraining with only breast images does not necessarily lead to a superior downstream task performance for breast-related tasks). These findings may also be useful when applying newer contrastive techniques to histopathology data. Pretrained PyTorch models are made publicly available at https://github.com/ozanciga/self-supervised-histopathology.

1. Introduction

The number of labeled images in machine learning tasks is found to be positively correlated with the task performance; however, labeled data is scarce and expensive. The problem is exacerbated in medical image analysis tasks, where expert annotations are often required and crowdsourcing is not usually an option. In many cases, labeling must also be done on-site due to regulations regarding dissemination of private patient data. In any medical image analysis task, the most laborious and time-consuming step tends to be labeling the data and several approaches have been proposed to mitigate this data annotation bottleneck. Unsupervised and self-supervised methods that can utilize unlabeled data, and semi-supervised methods that use partially labeled data, have been found to improve task performance (Campbell et al., 2019a; Komura & Ishikawa, 2018; Peikari, Salama, Nofech-Mozes, & Martel, 2021).

Until recently, most self-supervised techniques have relied on natural-scene image properties which are not applicable to histopathology images. However, recent contrastive learning approaches can be

applied to digital pathology images (see Section 2). In this work, we use residual networks pretrained with self-supervised learning to learn generalizable features. We employ SimCLR (Chen, Kornblith, Norouzi, & Hinton, 2020), a contrastive self-supervised technique that has comparable performance to the supervised ResNet 50 network on top-1 classification accuracy for the ILSVRC2012 dataset. We pretrain residual networks with this method and use the pretrained networks in downstream tasks for multiple tasks on multiple, multi-organ digital histopathology datasets. We explore different data sampling strategies to understand the amount and the type of data that leads to a representation that improves task performances over ImageNet pretraining or training from scratch. Specifically, we examine the impact of the number of images used for pretraining, resolution, staining, and tissue type on the learned representations and downstream task performance. Furthermore, we compare multiple image augmentation strategies to identify the best practices when pretraining for digital histopathology.

Our results indicate that pretraining with unlabeled histopathology images can improve task performances over ImageNet pretraining and

* Correspondence to: Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, 2075 Bayview Ave., M6 G0N, Toronto, ON M4N 3M5, Canada.

E-mail addresses: ozan.ciga@mail.utoronto.ca (O. Ciga), tony.xu@alumni.ubc.ca (T. Xu), anne.louise@utoronto.ca (A.L. Martel).

^1^
 Present address: Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, 5300-3332 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC Canada V6T 1Z4.

^2^
 Present address: Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, 2075 Bayview Ave., M6 G0N, Toronto, ON M4N 3M5, Canada.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mlwa.2023.101918

Received 20 May 2021; Received in revised form 15 September 2021; Accepted 24 October 2021

Available online 6 November 2021

2666-8270/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

---

<!-- Page 2 -->

O. Cige, T. Xu and A.L. Marrel

Machine Learning with Applications 3 (2022) 100398

estimate labeled data requirements for various classification, regression, and segmentation tasks.

## 2. Related work

Unsupervised learning has been a long-standing goal of computer-aided diagnostic systems. Previously, sparse and variational autoencoders have been used to learn latent representations of unlabeled data (e.g., learning filter banks at multiple scales) (Chuang, Han, Zhong, Snijders, & Mao, 2017; Hou et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2015) and generative adversarial networks have been used for tissue and cell-level classification, medical segmentation, and cell counting (Hu et al., 2018). Most of these unsupervised methods are not applicable to structures larger than cells or to tasks more complicated than distinguishing tissue and disease, medical segmentation, and cell counting. They work with (e.g., 64 × 64 pixels), and due to the limited information that can be encoded by such methods. They may also require custom networks, and may only be applicable to applications with specific research or statistical needs.

Self-supervised learning is a promising subclass of unsupervised learning, where the raw input data is used to generate the learning signal (e.g., a probability of mutual information or cluster density). These methods can generally be applied to larger images and work with standard architectures such as residual networks (He, Zhang, Ren, & Sun, 2016). Context-based self-supervised methods rearrange the images and tasks (e.g., in mutual information or cluster density), instance, Norouzi and Favaro (2016) tile an image into nine square pieces and then shuffle the tiles, whereas Gidaris, Singh, and Komodakis (2018) use the input image as a reference to predict the noise, pretraining to obtain the original input using a neural network, which is effectively pretrained for downstream tasks by performing predictions on tile orderings or rotation angles, respectively. While contextual information has been used in a number of applications in either case, the structures within histopathological images are elastic and may form infinitely many valid groupings. Therefore, these techniques are not directly applicable to histopathology without the noise, pretraining rotations is not a viable task for whole slide images, since cells and surrounding structures will have a valid arrangement in the rotated image as well. In histopathology, Gilchrist and Kainmuu (2019) use spatial adjacency as a signal for similarity, and the pretraining task is to label image pairs as similar or dissimilar based on the spatial distance on a whole slide image. Tellez, Litiens, van der Laak, and Cioni (2019) also utilize contrastive learning by applying augmentations on image patches extracted from WSIs. Their aim is to learn salient features by distinguishing if two augmented images are from the same source image.

Recently, contrastive approaches based on learning latent-space features by discriminating between unlabeled training samples achieved state-of-the-art results in computer vision tasks. Such contrastive learning methods assume that under minor transformations, two views of the same image patch should have similar feature representations (Becker & Hinton, 1992). Importantly, since contrastive methods only rely on consistency at the instance level, they do not require explicit supervision of the ground truth, making them applicable to digital histopathology images. The consistency assumption has been exploited by Dosovitskiy, Springenberg, Riedmiller, and Brox (2016) to obtain a representation of the whole slide image, for instance, Later, Wu, Xiong, Yu, and Lin (2018) extended Dosovitskiy et al. (2014) into a non-parametric feature representation using a variational autoencoder (VAE) and a memory bank. The memory bank is used for selecting negative examples for each training instance, where any image that is not another view or augmentation of the original training instance is considered negative. The memory bank is then used to obtain a representation of the whole slide image, and feature vectors. The use of simple image augmentations (e.g., resizing images, horizontal flips, color jittering, etc.) and memory banks have

proved successful in learning representations by maximizing the mutual information between latent representations of positives (Gschambn, Hjelm, & Buchwalter, 2019; He, Fan, Wu, Xie, & Girshick, 2020; Hénaff et al., 2019). Data augmentations have also been utilized by applying the appropriate contrastive loss function on the feature vectors of positive and negative image pairs (Misra & Maaten, 2020; Tian, Krishnan, & Iola, 2019).

Recently, Chen, Kornblith, Norouzi et al. (2020) proposed a contrastive learning approach that does not require a custom network or a memory bank, but instead relies on using a large number of minibatch augmentations of the input image. The input is pre-trained by doing so, they were able to improve the quality of learned representations by providing more negative samples per training instance over training epochs. Along with a few architectural improvements, this method outperforms aforementioned techniques by a large margin (+7%) and has comparable performance to the supervised ResNet 50 model when its features are used in training a linear classifier for the ImageNet-1000 classification task (Norouzi et al., 2015). This method was later incrementally improved by Grill et al. (2020) through techniques such as exponential moving averaging of the model parameters, and by using a two-layer convolutional block and using larger projection layers (Chen, Kornblith, Sweeney, Norouzi, & Hinton, 2020). We choose not to explore these techniques in this paper as the added increase in performance (~4% in ImageNet top-1 accuracy) cannot be justified by the increase in the number of trainable parameters (e.g., ~800 million trainable parameters versus ~24 million).

## 3. The method

### 3.1. Contrastive self-supervised learning

We use the contrastive learning method proposed by Chen, Kornblith, Norouzi et al. (2020) which relies on maximizing agreement between two views of the input image, which are augmented with the same image (see Fig. 1). Specifically, given an image i, a probabilistic augmentation function f_{\theta}, a neural network or an encoder f_{\phi} (where \theta and \phi are learnable parameters), a projection layer g(\cdot) with parameters \theta, the aim is to match z_i normalized feature representations of two augmentations of the same image given by z_1 = g(f_{\theta}(f_{\phi}(i))). Simultaneously, other images in a batch are made dissimilar from the image i through a contrastive loss function called NT-Xent (the normalized temperature-scaled cross-entropy loss), defined as

L_c = -\log \frac{\exp(\text{similarity}(z_1, z_2)/\tau)}{\sum_{i=1}^n \exp(\text{similarity}(z_1, z_i)/\tau)} \quad (1)

where \tau is the temperature parameter that helps weigh different examples in the batch. The similarity function \text{similarity}(u, v) is defined as \text{similarity}(u, v) = 1 - \text{MSE}(u, v) where \text{MSE}(u, v) is the mean squared error between outputs 1 when k \neq i and 0 otherwise, and the similarity function is a distance metric between two \epsilon_2 normalized vectors. We refer to output of f_{\phi}(\cdot) as the pre-activation layer output, and the output of g(\cdot) as the MLP output in Fig. 1, and z_i. The auxiliary projection layer is a single hidden layer MLP which is used to project the pre-activation layer output into a lower embedding space. Comparing z_1 and z_2 was found to be more effective than comparing the pre-activation layer outputs, the pre-activation layer outputs are, we cosine similarity defined as \text{similarity}(u, v) = u^T v / \|u\| \|v\|. The authors explicitly find that the NT-Xent loss is more effective than representing similar loss functions such as margin (Schroff, Kalenchenko, & Puliubin, 2015) or logistic (Mikolov, Chen, Corrado, & Dean, 2013) losses.

For each pretraining step with a batch size of 2N, each augmented image is passed through a variational autoencoder (VAE) and a memory bank. By using samples in the same batch as negative samples, we avoid the expensive explicit negative example mining present in many other contrastive loss functions (Wu et al. (2018) are able to scale up batch sizes where each pretraining step simultaneously optimizes for -N^2 feature vectors.

2

---

<!-- Page 3 -->

O. Ciga, T. Xu and A.L. Mural

Machine Learning with Applications 7 (2022) 100198

Fig. 1. Overview of the method. The block represented as CNN is identical for all image patches, only replicated in the figure for clarity. We augment each image twice, extract features using the CNN at the pre-activation output, and transform these features into a lower embedding space at the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) output. While the augmented image patches from the same original source are pulled together (green arrows) in the feature space (at the MLP output), image patches from different sources are pushed apart using the NT-Xent loss function (both solid and dashed red arrows represent an identical push operation, shown as such in figure for clarity). The aim is to pretrain the network such that similarity between augmented views is used as a signal for learning latent features at the pre-activation layer. The figure is inspired from Chen, Kornblith, Norouzi et al. (2020).

Defining image diversity for histopathology. The contrastive method exploits the variability in visual properties between images patches to learn salient features. Obtaining visually diverse patches is challenging for digital histopathology, especially when images are viewed under high resolution. Given multiple unlabeled datasets, we assume that selecting images with different staining, resolution and tissue types will lead to a more diverse dataset compared to selecting image patches extracted from the same WSI or sampling images from the same dataset. In our early experiments, we found that pretraining with the dataset constructed using the former approach resulted in better validation performance than constructing a pretraining dataset where images are sampled from a single dataset. Furthermore, when images are inspected visually, the former approach exhibits more diversity (see Fig. 2).

#### 4. Experiments

##### 4.1. Pretraining datasets

Retaining datasets include images from sites such as blood, breast, lymph, colon, bone, prostate, liver, pancreas, bladder, cervix, esophagus, head, neck, kidney, lung, thyroid, uterus, bone marrow, skin, brain, stomach, and ovary. Out of the total 57 datasets, 22 are comprised of image patches, 35 are WSI datasets. Most datasets are stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and come at the highest resolution of 0.25 µm/pixel (commonly referred to as 40x). While the majority of the WSI datasets are from The Cancer Genome Atlas Program (TCGA) and Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) databases, we also use multiple public challenge datasets from lymph and breast cancer tasks. Image patch datasets are collected from various publicly available sources and exhibit similar organ diversity as WSI datasets. For the detailed list of pretraining datasets, please refer to Appendix F.1.

##### 4.2. Validation experiments

Validation datasets. We validate pretrained networks trained under multiple settings (e.g., training only with a single dataset or tissue type, different number of training images etc.) on five classification, two segmentation and one regression dataset. The classification datasets include BACH (four class breast cancer classification), lymph (three class malignant lymph node cancer classification), BreakHisV1 (binary breast cancer classification), NCT-CRC-HE-100K (nine class colorectal cancer tissue classification), and Gleason2019 (five class prostate cancer classification). Segmentation datasets are BACH (four class breast cancer segmentation on WSIs) and DigestPath2019 (WSI segmentation of early-stage colon tumors into healthy and cancerous tissue). Our single regression dataset is the BreastPathQ, which involves assigning a percentage cancer cellularity score to a given image patch. See Appendix C.1 for the detailed explanation of each validation set. In the following, abbreviations NCT, Bpq, and Dp19 refer to NCT-CRC-HE100K, BreastPathQ, and DigestPath2019, respectively.

Tasks. We compare pretrained networks with randomly initialized and ImageNet pretrained Resnet 18, 34, 50 and 101. For segmentation tasks, we use a UNet architecture (Ronneberger, Fischer, & Brox, 2015) which contains a pretrained encoder and a randomly initialized decoder. We compare two supervised training settings: fine-tuning and last layer training. In order to assess the learned representations directly, we freeze each residual network at the pre-activation layer and only train a linear classifier or a regressor on the learned representations (last layer training). The last layer supervised training setting is used for the segmentation task, since the UNet-like decoder (Yakubovskiy, 2020) that we use contains a considerable number of trainable parameters to the pretrained Resnet encoder, and can

3

---

<!-- Page 4 -->

O. Ciga, T. Xu and A.L. Mural

Machine Learning with Applications 7 (2022) 100198

(a) Multiple dataset sampling.

(b) Sampling a single dataset (Camelyon 17).

Fig. 2. Defining image diversity in the context of digital histopathology. Images evenly sampled from all 60 datasets visually look more diverse compared to sampling only from a single dataset containing multiple WSIs.

mitigate the benefits of using a pretrained encoder or ImageNet initialization. We also train each network without freezing any layers (fine-tuning). While fine-tuning is commonly employed, freezing various layers of a network may be used to avoid overfitting whenever the training dataset is small. Furthermore, pretrained features can also be used in clustering (see Section 5.3), feature selection, and in more traditional machine learning methods such as decision trees and support vector machines.

Validation setup. We train for 100 epochs per experiment, use Adam optimizer, a batch size of 128 with a weight decay of 0.00001 for Resnet18 models, and 0.0001 otherwise. We found that 100 epochs is enough for convergence for each validation dataset for all the networks (e.g., Resnet101 considered in this work). We use 50% of the original dataset as the training, 25% as validation, and 25% as the test set. We use macro F_1 score as our validation metric for the classification and segmentation tasks. Macro F_1 weight each class equally regardless of the number of samples per class, which accounts for the class imbalance seen in most digital histopathology datasets. For the regression task, we compute the mean absolute error (L_1) on the predictions and the ground truth regression labels (varying between 0 to 100%). The test metrics corresponding to the maximum validation metrics are reported. Please refer to the Appendix A for the definitions of evaluation metrics.

## 5. Results

Unless otherwise stated, all pretraining experiments are conducted with the Resnet18 model, and validation experiments were conducted without freezing any layers of the network. We use “pretraining” to refer to the unsupervised pretraining. Pretrained networks are then used for “supervised” training on validation datasets. A dataset with half a million images of size 224 x 224 pixels can be pretrained for 1000 epochs using PyTorch on 4 T P100 GPUs in about 24 h for a Resnet 18 model. For a detailed explanation of augmentation and hyperparameter selection for the pretraining stage, please refer to Appendix C.

In the following, we report the average classification and segmentation macro F_1 scores, as well as the L_1 error for the regression, in the appropriate subsection. The expanded results with individual datasets for each experiment are given in Appendix D.

Table 1The downstream task performance of networks trained on top of the pretraining. ImageNet initialization, and randomly initialized network (R denotes Resnet). We report F_1 score percentages (higher is better) averaged over five validation datasets for the classification task (Cls.), mean L_1 error difference (lower is better) between the ground truth and the predicted cellularity percentage for one dataset for regression (Reg.), and average two F_1 scores (higher is better) for segmentation (Seg.).

| R. | Pretrain. | Cls. [%] | Reg. [ L_1 ] | Seg. [%] |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 18 | Random | 55.7 | 13.5 | 59. |
| 18 | ImageNet | 66.7 | 9.3 | 73.5 |
| 18 | Self sup. | 77.0 | 6.6 | 74.0 |
| 34 | Random | 57.7 | 13.7 | 58.7 |
| 34 | ImageNet | 65.7 | 7.1 | 66.2 |
| 34 | Self sup. | 77.9 | 5.9 | 66.6 |
| 50 | Random | 55.3 | 13.3 | 58.8 |
| 50 | ImageNet | 65.8 | 7.0 | 69.7 |
| 50 | Self sup. | 76.9 | 5.5 | 66.7 |
| 101 | Random | 53.0 | 15.1 | 57.7 |
| 101 | ImageNet | 67.0 | 6.7 | 69. |
| 101 | Self sup. | 76.2 | 5.3 | 65.9 |

### 5.1. Overall comparison

We compare networks pretrained with self-supervision, ImageNet initialization, and randomly initialized networks for Resnet 18, 34, 50, and 101 in Table 1. For comparison to other self- and unsupervised methods, please refer to Appendix E.

We find that pretraining is superior to ImageNet on classification and regression tasks for all settings. Self-supervision is comparable to ImageNet for segmentation in Resnet 18 and 34. For larger networks, ImageNet performs better.

### 5.2. Pretraining is most useful when only a small number of training images is available

It is generally accepted that pretrained networks boost the performance in self-image analysis (Tajbakhsh et al., 2016) and digital histopathology tasks (Mehra et al., 2018). We conduct validation experiments for the classification and regression tasks for all datasets

4

---

<!-- Page 5 -->

O. Ciga, T. Xu and A.L. Marek

Machine Learning with Applications 7 (2022) 100198

Fig. 3. Classification results showing the macro F_1 score on the five validation datasets, and the regression results showing the mean absolute error (L_1) on the BreastPathQ dataset for four differently sized Resnet models, when the supervised training was conducted without freezing any layers (fine tuning). We report the F_1 score and the L_1 error when (5, 10, 20, 50, 100%) of the labeled data is used for supervised training. Each percentage setting was run five times using different samples where the average and the standard deviation of five runs are shown as dots and error bars.

using (5, 10, 20, 50, 100%) of each training dataset, where for each percentage value we repeat experiments five times to obtain a better estimate of the performance. By limiting the amount of training data, we compare the effect of training dataset size on different pretraining settings. Specifically, we compare random initialization, ImageNet pre-training and self-supervised pretraining for networks Resnet 18, 34, 50 and 101. We report detailed results per dataset on Fig. 3.

We found that in the absence of a large training set, training a classifier or a regression network using a pretrained initialization can improve the performance. For instance, self-supervision outperforms training from scratch (random setting) by over 40% for the NCT dataset when only 5% of the labeled images are used for training. When more

data is used, self-supervision still remains superior to both ImageNet and random initializations.

### 5.3. Features obtained by pretraining are more representative for histopathological image patches than ImageNet features

We compare representations learned through self-supervision with the pretrained ImageNet features and randomly initialized residual network weights by training linear classifiers on the pre-activation layer of the Resnet models for the validation datasets. For Resnet 18 and Resnet 34, this amounts to 512 features, and to 2048 features for Resnet 50 and Resnet 101. We use 100% of the available data for each experiment. We

5

---

<!-- Page 6 -->

O. Cigic, T. Xu and A.L. Marnel

Machine Networks 7 (2022) 1001938

### Table 2

The downstream task performance of linear classifiers trained on top of the learned features by self-supervision, ImageNet initialization, and randomly initialized networks. The network weights up to the pre-classification layer are frozen and not updated except for the linear classification layer. We report F_1 scores averaged over five validation datasets for the classification task; mean L_1 difference between the ground truth and the predicted cellularity percentage for one dataset for regression. Segmentation results using frozen encoders are omitted since a decoder can contain millions of parameters that can be trained to achieve satisfactory performance regardless of the encoder.

| R | P | Pretain. | Cls. [%] | Reg. [L 1 ] |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 18 | Random | Self. sup. | 35.5 | 27.0 |
| 18 | Random | ImageNet | 41.1 | 14.4 |
| 18 | Random | Self. sup. | 69.3 | 11.6 |
| 34 | Random | Self. sup. | 35.0 | 29.3 |
| 34 | Random | ImageNet | 44.5 | 15.4 |
| 34 | Random | Self. sup. | 67.6 | 13.5 |
| 50 | Random | Self. sup. | 34.5 | 29.1 |
| 50 | Random | ImageNet | 46.4 | 12.9 |
| 50 | Random | Self. sup. | 69.6 | 10.3 |
| 101 | Random | Self. sup. | 27.2 | 2490.7 |
| 101 | Random | ImageNet | 45.0 | 12.9 |
| 101 | Random | Self. sup. | 71.1 | 10.6 |

performed the same comparison for the regression task, where we freeze the network at the pre-activation layer and trained a single regression layer. We do not include analogous frozen encoder experiments for the segmentation task since the encoder contains millions of parameters that can be trained to achieve satisfactory performance regardless of the encoder weights. We report the average results in Table 2, and the detailed results per dataset on Fig. 4.

The self-supervised network achieves better results than ImageNet initialization, which indicates our method has learned domain-specific features that can be used, especially when training sample is scarce. One may freeze and obtain features from various domains of the network for training various machine learning models, including neural networks, support vector machine or random forest classifiers.

Unsupervised clustering using the learned representations. Learned representations can be used for clustering without any labeled training examples. In this section, we use learned representations to cluster image patches extracted from WSUs. Note that the learned features can also be used for querying an image to its nearest neighbors without clustering the dataset, which is useful in applications such as active learning for sample selection and various data retrieval systems.

Negative mining is an important task in most tasks involving WSUs. For the purpose of the experiment, we use a representative of a negative imaging task on WSUs from a dataset including post-neoadjuvant therapy BRCA specimen with annotations of regions containing tumor (Martel, Nottef-Moues, Salama, Akbar, & Pehlari, 2019). In this dataset, Salama, Nottef-Moues, & Martel, 2017). Randomly sampling patches from a WSU will result in a large class imbalance in favor of negatives, which leads to an increased ratio of false negatives. One may mitigate this issue by aggregating the sampled patches and selecting a subset of “representative” patches. This is done by clustering, where we rely on the learned visual features to cluster the patches. We first cluster their relative distance to each other in the feature space. Specifically, we sample 1.4 million images from 69 WSUs and cluster images into three thousand clusters, where the number of clusters are determined using a elbow plot (Bergstra et al., 2011). We use 2500 images (1000, 1500, ..., 10000), explained variance is 67.1% when 2500 clusters is used, 83.3% when 3000 clusters is used, and 91% when 3500 clusters is used. We use the first 3500 images (2500, 3000, ..., 3500) generated by the Resne18 trained using self-supervision. The features are clustered using the mini-batch K-means algorithm. The resulting clusters are used in the experiments of their feature representations. In addition, we select a few clusters and highlight them on WSUs to segment various regions of interests without any supervision (Fig. 6).

### Table 3

The effect of the number of images used for pretraining in the downstream task performance for classification, regression, and segmentation tasks. We report F_1 scores averaged over five validation datasets for the classification task, mean L_1 difference between the ground truth and the predicted cellularity percentage for one dataset for regression, and average two F_1 scores for segmentation.

| % of images | Cls. [%] | Reg. [L 1 ] | Seg. [%] |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0.01% | 36.5 | 8.5 | 62.7 |
| 0.1% | 73.9 | 7.8 | 72.8 |
| 1% | 77.0 | 6.8 | 70.8 |
| 10% | 79.1 | 6.6 | 73.5 |

### Table 4

Examining the impact of resolution on task performance. We use images from one resolution for pretraining and evaluate the pretrained network on all available validation datasets. 10x, 20x, and 40x refer to 1 μm/pixel, 0.50 μm/pixel and 0.25 μm/pixel, respectively. 300x is the F_1 score averaged over five validation datasets for the classification task, mean L_1 difference between the ground truth and the predicted cellularity percentage for one dataset for regression, and average two F_1 scores for segmentation.

| Resolution | Cls. [%] | Reg. [L 1 ] |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 10x | 61.0 | 10.9 |
| 20x | 60.5 | 9.9 |
| 40x | 65.4 | 9.4 |
| 10, 20, 40x | 67.0 | 9.3 |

## 5.4. Using more unlabeled images in pretraining improves the downstream task performance

Extracting patches of size 224 × 224 pixels from WSUs that contain foreground (refer to Appendix D) can lead to a few million patches per dataset, which can quickly become intractable. Therefore, we randomly sample a maximum of 100 patches from each WSU and use all images from non-WSU datasets to generate a large unsupervised pretraining dataset. We use the maximum available resolution per WSU, which is ~0.25 μm/pixel or ~0.50 μm/pixel depending on the dataset. We use 20k images from each WSU dataset and sample 100 images from four million patches from 35 WSU datasets containing around 25 thousand WSUs. We compare using {0.01, 0.1, 1, 10}% of the sampled datasets with a maximum of two thousand and a minimum of 10 images per dataset if the number of images corresponding to the percentage setting for a dataset is below 10. In the end, we obtain 4, 40 and 400 thousand images per percentage setting. In addition, we pretrain a model using only 10 images per dataset (~0.01% of all available images). In this sense, we sample 10 images per dataset from each WSU dataset as well, which can contain a few million image patches across all WSUs in that dataset. Therefore, the dataset is drastically undersampled. The results can be seen in Table 5.

We found that using a larger training set outperforms using a training set with fewer images. Notably, we observe diminishing returns with every order of magnitude of increase in dataset size. While the difference between images corresponding to 0.1% of the available images is 7.4% in average F_1 for the classification task, the difference between 1% and 10% is around 2.1%.

### 5.5. The impact of resolution on the pretraining

To assess the impact of resolution on the learned features, we pretrain a network using 1 μm/pixel images from WSUs. We use a breast image dataset, originally aimed to identify the invasive ductal carcinoma grade at multiple resolutions (Bohassani, Amjed, Tabatabaeian, & Jashji, 2020). In the results shown in Table 4, 10x, 20x, and 40x refer to 1 μm/pixel, 0.50 μm/pixel, and 0.25 μm/pixel, respectively. We pretrain networks using images with resolutions 10x, 20x, and 40x, in addition to using all available images (10, 20, 40x).

6

---

<!-- Page 7 -->

O. Ciga, T. Xu and A.L. Mural

Machine Learning with Applications 7 (2022) 100198

Figure 4 consists of two main sections: Classification and Regression.

Classification Section: This section displays macro F_1 scores for five datasets (BACH, NCT, Breaks, Lymph, Gleason2019) across four different Resnet models (Resnet18, Resnet34, Resnet50, Resnet101). Each plot shows the macro F_1 score on the y-axis (ranging from 20 to 80) against the labeled data percentage on the x-axis (5, 10, 20, 50, 100%). Three training methods are compared: Self-supervised (blue line with circles), Imagenet (orange line with squares), and Random (green line with triangles). Generally, the macro F_1 score increases as the labeled data percentage increases, with the Self-supervised method often showing the highest performance.

Regression Section: This section displays the mean absolute error (L_1) for four different Resnet models (Resnet18, Resnet34, Resnet50, Resnet101). Each plot shows the mean absolute error on the y-axis (ranging from 0 to 30) against the labeled data percentage on the x-axis (5, 10, 20, 50, 100%). Three training methods are compared: Self-supervised (blue line with circles), Imagenet (orange line with squares), and Random (green line with triangles). The mean absolute error generally decreases as the labeled data percentage increases, with the Self-supervised method often showing the lowest error.

Fig. 4. Classification results showing the macro F_1 score on the five validation datasets, and the regression results showing the mean absolute error (L_1) on the BreastPathQ dataset for four differently sized Resnet models, when the supervised training was conducted by freezing all the layers except the linear classification or the linear regression layer (last layer setting). We report the F_1 score when {5, 10, 20, 50, 100%} of the labeled data is used for supervised training. Each percentage setting was run five times using different samples where the average and the standard deviation of five runs are shown as dot and error bars. For the Resnet 101, last layer training, randomly initialized network's error is too large to fit in the plot.

We find that the networks pretrained on images at higher resolutions tend to perform better in downstream tasks. Furthermore, we find that combining multiple resolutions further improves task performances.

##### 5.6. Transferability of features between tissue types and staining

To assess if it is better to pretrain with datasets drawn exclusively from a similar tissue type to that present in the target task, we conducted separate experiments using Resnet 18 with three different tissue types: breast, lymph nodes and prostate. Specifically, we trained a

network using only Camelyon 16 and Camelyon 17 datasets for lymph nodes, and TCGA-PRAD and Prostate-MRI datasets for prostate. Due to the greater availability of data for breast, we trained on a larger number of datasets: TCGA-BRCA, TUPAC16, TNBC, several datasets from Andrew Janowczyk, KIRK2014 and CPH2012 (see Table 1.3 for dataset descriptions). For each experiment, roughly the same number of training images were used (~ four thousand). The results can be viewed in Table 3.

Due to the site-specific pretraining (i.e., the tissue used in pretraining), we did not observe a strong correlation between the pretrained model and the validation performance. For instance, prostate models

7

---

<!-- Page 8 -->

O. Ciga, T. Xu and A.L. Mural

Machine Learning with Applications 7 (2022) 100198

Fig. 5. Sampling image patches from whole-slide images randomly versus feature based K-means clustering. Each figure is extracted from an actual experiment. In Fig. 5(b), each yellow box shows three samples clustered in the center of a randomly selected cluster for illustration. Note that visually similar patches with features such as out-of-focus regions, creases, ink marks of different colors, morphological structures such as ducts, outlines of the nipple, and red blood cells are clustered together. Furthermore, patches with varying nuclei formation patterns are also clustered roughly according to their density. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

(a) Squamous regions are highlighted.

(b) Clusters representing creases, out of focus regions, and suncracks.

Fig. 6. A practical application of unsupervised clustering in digital histopathology. We first cluster 1.4 million feature vectors corresponding to image patches into three thousand clusters without any supervision. Then, these clusters are used to highlight different regions of interest on whole-slide images.

#### Table 5

Examining the transferability of features between organs. We use images from one organ for pretraining and validate it on all available validation datasets. We report F_1 scores averaged over five validation datasets for the classification task, mean I_c, indicate between the ground truth and the predicted cellularity percentage for one dataset for regression, and average two F_1 scores for segmentation.

| Tissue | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Regression [ I_c ] | Regression [ I_c ] | Segmentation [%] | Segmentation [%] | Segmentation [%] |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Tissue | BACH | NCT | BreakHis | Lymph | Gleason2019 | Average | Bpc | BACH | Dtp19 | Average |
| Breast | 75 | 86 | 79.1 | 73.8 | 47.5 | 72.2 | 7.5 | 49.0 | 44.9 | 67.0 |
| Lymph | 75.1 | 83.1 | 76 | 70.6 | 48.4 | 70.6 | 8.2 | 48.0 | 83.3 | 65.7 |
| Prostate | 78.3 | 80.6 | 75.4 | 65.9 | 54.7 | 71.0 | 8.7 | 56.5 | 84.5 | 70.5 |

outperformed breast models on the BACH dataset for both breast cancer classification and segmentation. Similarly, the lymph model was outperformed by the breast model on the malignant lymph cancer detection. However, it should be noted that for some datasets the site-specific pretraining yielded better performance. For instance, breast model performed the best on the BreastPathQ dataset and prostate model outperformed other models on the Gleason prostate cancer grading. In addition, we observed poorer performance compared to training with all datasets, where the results in Tables 1 and D.7 indicate using images from a more diverse pretraining dataset with comparable

number of pretraining images leads to better performance across all tasks.

## 6. Discussion

In Section 5.1, we have observed that the self supervision performs better than the ImageNet initialization for the segmentation task for Resnet 18 and 34. In contrast, for Resnet 50 and 101, ImageNet performs better. We hypothesize this is due to the increased number

8

---

<!-- Page 9 -->

O. Ciga, T. Xu and A.L. Martel

Machine Learning with Applications 7 (2022) 100198

of trainable parameters for the decoder, diminishing the effect of pretraining the encoder.

In Section 5.6, we have observed that the tissue type used as data for pretraining was not correlated to the downstream task performance on the validation datasets. We believe the lack of correlation and the degradation compared to using all tissue types can be due to the following factors: (1) limitations of the contrastive approach where representations are incapable of encoding domain-specific information in the absence of the tissue type, (2) convolutional networks are highly sensitive to visual properties such as staining, resolution and morphological shapes, and do not encode abstract features in the absence of specific information (e.g., cancer grading), (3) the network can only be incentivized to encode a cancer gradient given a diverse pretraining dataset.

## 7. Conclusion

Our main objective in this work was to show that, for pretraining, we can learn better features to improve performances on multiple downstream tasks, including classification, regression, and segmentation. We proposed a revised pathological image analysis with a training regimen that consistently achieves comparable performance to ImageNet pretraining without additional complexity. To our knowledge, there is no prior research on histopathological image analysis with a training regimen that consistently reaches or surpasses supervised training. In addition, this is the first study which uses a very large number of images in digital histopathology setting: 23 image datasets with over 206 thousand patches and ~25 thousand gigapixel-resolution images in 35 datasets that consist of whole-slide images.

We have shown that the success of the contrastive pretraining method heavily relies on the diversity of the unlabeled training set, as opposed to the number of images. This is an important consideration when one adopts a technique from the computer vision community, where most methods are validated on natural scene images that contain significant more diversity than digital images. Furthermore, we have shown that the site which the training images were extracted from did not have a substantial effect on the quality of learned representations, as shown in Section 5.6. While this shows a clear divergence from the training of human experts who focus on a specific organ, it can significantly increase the number of available datasets in training such systems.

In this work, we focused on the simplest contrastive method which significantly improved the state-of-the-art and experimented under multiple settings outlined in Section 4 to understand the capabilities and limitations of the contrastive training for histopathology images. We also showed that the naturalistic pretraining framework with a training framework remain the same, the insights we obtained will still be valid for future work on self-supervision. Overall, we found that contrasting images which are visually distinguishable helped in learning salient representations. In contrast, images which look similar with small nuances that are important in histopathology (e.g., single cell tumors that only occupy a small portion of a given patch) were not suitable for contrastive learning, and led to noisy representations. We also showed that the naturalistic pretraining framework is working on digital histopathology images need to address domain-specific issues to bridge the gap between histopathology and computer vision in self-supervised learning.

### CRedit authorship contribution statement

Ozan Ciga: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Data curation, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Tony Xu: Software, Writing – original draft, Validation. Anne Louise Martel: Supervision, Investigation, Writing – review & editing.

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgments

This work was funded by Canadian Cancer Society (grant #705772) and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) (grant # RGPIN-2016-062828). It was also enabled in part by support provided by Compute Canada (https://compute.canada.ca/). The results shown here are in part based upon data generated by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Research Network: https://www.cancer.org/tcgac, and the Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC): https://cptac-data-portal.proteomic.org/cptacPublic/.

## Appendix A. Evaluation metrics

| \frac{tp}{ip + tp} | precision | (A.1) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| \frac{tp + fn}{ip + fn} | recall | (A.2) |
| \frac{\text{precision} - \text{recall}}{\text{precision} + \text{recall}} | F1 score | (A.3) |

\frac{tp}{ip + tp} stands for true positive, ip is false positive and fn is false negative. We use macro F_1 score in reporting classification and segmentation results. Macro F_1 assigns the same weight to each class-wise score prior to averaging over all classes to take the class imbalance present in most of our validation datasets into account.

We use the L_1 error for the regression task. L_1 is defined as the mean absolute difference (MAD) between ground truth g_i and the prediction (pred) over N samples or \sum_{i=1}^N |g_i - \text{pred}_i|. The subscript i indexes the ground truth and prediction belonging to sample i.

## Appendix B. Background filtering

Due to their immense size, WSIs contain many regions that may be irrelevant for histopathology, such as ink, creases, fat, and white background. We threshold each WSI in HSV color space, with the following threshold parameters: 0.65 < h < 0.5, \text{saturation} > 0.1, and 0.9 > \text{value} > 0.5. The bounds are experimentally determined using a public dataset from the Cancer Genome Atlas et al. (2012) to isolate the irrelevant background regions. Each WSI is tiled into patches of size 224 \times 224 pixels, and patches with foreground ratios \geq 50\% are used as unsupervised training data.

## Appendix C. Hyperparameter and suitable augmentation selection

Setup. We conduct experiments to determine the best hyperparameter setting for histopathology images. We pretrain a Resnet 18 using ~40 public datasets from the Cancer Genome Atlas validation datasets. We use the average macro F1 metric on five validation datasets for the classification task to select each hyperparameter. We compare temperatures (0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 10) and Adam learning rates (128, 256, 512). We use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014), Lars (You, Gimman, & Ginsburg, 2017), and Lamb (You et al., 2019) optimizers to account for the large batch size. We use learning rates 0.3 \times \text{batchsize}^{1/256}, 2 \times 10^{-4} \times \text{batchsize}^{1/256}, and 10^{-4} for Lars, Lamb, and Adam, respectively, as proposed by Chen, Kornblith, Norouzi et al. (2020) for Lamb and by You et al. (2017) for Lamb. We use 10^{-6} as the weight decay.

Since the original set of augmentations were applied on naturalistic images, we applied the same augmentations on histopathology images based on data augmentations with minor modifications. For instance, the original paper uses 8% to 100% randomly resized crops,

9

---

<!-- Page 10 -->

O. Ciga, T. Xu and A.L. Marel

Machine Learning with Applications 6 (2022) 100198

Table C.6

Comparison between Lars and Lamb optimizers used for large batch pretraining, a self-supervised network. In optimizer selection experiments, we use baseline augmentations which consist of crop (0.9 \times 0.9, 180^\circ, 270^\circ) image rotations, flip in each axis with 50% probability, Gaussian blurring, and light color jittering. Results are shown in matrix F_1 scores.

| Optimizer | Temperature | BACH | NCT | Breakkils | Lymph | Gleason2019 | Average |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Lars | 0.05 | 77.2 | 87.2 | 73.9 | 73.2 | 49.8 | 72.2 |
| Lars | 0.1 | 80.2 | 82.7 | 73.9 | 80.9 | 51.7 | 73.9 |
| Lars | 0.50 | 73.9 | 81.3 | 75.5 | 69.2 | 51.9 | 70.4 |
| Lars | 0.50 | 74.7 | 83.5 | 67.8 | 74.1 | 53.7 | 70.8 |
| Lamb | 0.05 | 79.6 | 84.1 | 71.4 | 71.9 | 51.9 | 71.8 |
| Lamb | 0.1 | 69.7 | 82.7 | 78 | 75.4 | 48 | 70.8 |
| Lamb | 0.50 | 79.6 | 84.1 | 71.4 | 71.9 | 51.9 | 71.8 |

Fig. C.7. Different combinations of color jittering and random cropping. The figures represent the mean F_1 scores averaged over five validation datasets. (For interpretation of the reference to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

whereas we compare minima (1%, 5%, 25%), with 100% as the maximum in all settings. We train for 1000 epochs per experiment. Since loss is a function of the temperature, performance cannot be assessed by comparing different cases of the loss. Therefore, each pre-trained network is assessed on independent validation datasets.

Data augmentations. In our experiments, we employ randomized sized crops, 90^\circ rotations, horizontal and vertical flips, photometric manipulation (color jittering) and Gaussian blurring as augmentations. We randomly select a rectangle corresponding to 1 to 100% of the area of the original image patch and resize it to the original image's size, stochastically rotate images with degrees in [0^\circ, 90^\circ, 180^\circ, 270^\circ] with equal (25%) probability, flip in each axis with 50% probability, and compare color jittering strategies where we adjust (brightness, contrast, saturation, hue) of a given image by a percentage value of the original image. Specifically, we compare three types of jittering augmentations

Table D.7

The downstream task performance of networks trained on top of the pretraining, ImageNet initialization, and randomly initialized network. We report F_1 scores averaged over five validation datasets for the classification task, mean t_{\text{diff}} difference between the ground truth and the predicted probability score for one dataset for regression, and average two F_1 scores for segmentation. Columns with the header R indicates the Resnet model, and Reg. stands for regression.

| R | Pretraining | Classification (%) | Classification (%) | Classification (%) | Classification (%) | Reg. (L 2 ) | Reg. (L 2 ) | Segmentation (%) | Segmentation (%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| R | Pretraining | BACH | NCT | Breakkils | Lymph | Gleason | Reg. (L 2 ) | Segmentation (%) |   |
| 18 | Random | 47.1 | 69.7 | 72.4 | 50.5 | 38.8 | 49.6 | 13.5 | 70.1 |
| 18 | ImageNet | 73.1 | 79.8 | 73.9 | 59.9 | 46.7 | 66.7 | 9.3 | 86.0 |
| 18 | Self-supervised | 80.0 | 98.0 | 76.3 | 82.3 | 58.3 | 70.0 | 6.8 | 86.0 |
| 18 | ImageNet | 66.3 | 81.9 | 72.8 | 58.6 | 48.9 | 66.7 | 13.7 | 40.7 |
| 34 | Random | 74.3 | 80.1 | 71.1 | 70.4 | 45.3 | 68.2 | 7.1 | 45.2 |
| 34 | ImageNet | 82.0 | 91.2 | 82.2 | 84.5 | 51.9 | 87.2 | 5.9 | 86.0 |
| 34 | Self-supervised | 49.8 | 61.2 | 77.2 | 58.2 | 42.9 | 55.3 | 13.3 | 44.1 |
| 34 | ImageNet | 67.3 | 79.9 | 72.2 | 58.5 | 51.0 | 65.8 | 7.0 | 51.9 |
| 101 | Random | 91.1 | 98.2 | 94.3 | 84.8 | 54.3 | 70.0 | 5.3 | 86.6 |
| 101 | ImageNet | 50.9 | 56.4 | 76.5 | 56.3 | 39.4 | 53.0 | 15.1 | 41.4 |
| 101 | Self-supervised | 70.6 | 80.7 | 76.3 | 93.6 | 50.9 | 67.0 | 6.7 | 50.7 |
| 101 | ImageNet | 81.8 | 86.7 | 78.7 | 83.9 | 51.4 | 76.2 | 5.3 | 46.0 |

with different strengths: light (Brightness=0.4, saturation=0.4, hue=0.2), medium (0.8, 0.8, 0.8, 0.2) and heavy (0.8, 0.8, 0.8, 0.4). Each number in parentheses represents the fraction of possible change in the corresponding color property, e.g., 40% shift in brightness in the light jittering augmentation setting. A 100% change in brightness can mean a fully dark image (0% brightness) or doubling the brightness value (200%). Finally, we employ Gaussian blurring 50% of the times, with standard deviation \sigma = [0.7, 1.0, 2.0] and blurred size 0.1 \times image patch's side length.

Results. In our initial experiments, we observed Adam did not converge for batch sizes \geq 256 and was discarded. A batch size of 512 performed the best for both optimizers for all temperature values and is used in all the subsequent experiments. The technique proposed by You et al. (2019) have shown better large batch training performance with faster convergence on convolutional networks. However, we observed that the proposed technique did not work because it was therefore used for the remaining experiments. We found smaller temperatures generally performed better, and larger ones (1, 2, 10) did not converge. The temperature parameter of 0.1 performed the best for both optimizers. For the complete list of experiments, please refer to Table C.6.

Interestingly, we found that randomly cropping 1% of the image patch and resizing it to its original size performed both 5% and 25% for medium and heavy color jittering settings. We found color jittering strongly correlated with the quality of learned representations. No color jittering has the lowest training loss since it is easy to distinguish between samples with different properties. However, it was outperformed by both light and heavy jittering settings. Overall, we observed that more aggressive augmentations resulted in better representations. For instance, while 1% of a 224 \times 224 patch (2 \times 2 square) cannot be used to distinguish the original patch it was extracted from, it still outperformed (5%, 25%) for the medium jittering setting, and outperformed the baseline across all settings by over 0.6%. The next best setting in F_1. We argue that the improvement is due to a regularization effect on the contrastive objective, which prevents saturation and overblurring. The performance of the balancing F_1 scores obtained from a combination of different augmentation and random cropping settings are shown in Table D.11 (see Fig. C.7).

10

---

<!-- Page 11 -->

O. Ciga, T. Xu and A.L. Mural

Machine Learning with Applications 7 (2022) 100198

**Table D.8**

The downstream task performance of linear classifiers trained on top of five learned features by self-supervision, ImageNet initialization, and randomly initialized network. We report F_1 scores averaged over five validation datasets for the classification task, mean L_1 difference between the ground truth and the predicted classification percentage for one dataset for regression, and average two F_1 scores for segmentation. Column with the header R indicates the Resnet model.

| R |   | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Regression [ L_1 ] | Regression [ L_1 ] | Regression [ L_1 ] |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| R |   | BACH | NCT | BreakHis | Lymph | Gleason2019 | Average | Bqpc | Bqpc |
| 18 | Random | 23.6 | 23.5 | 73.1 | 34.3 | 23.0 | 35.5 | 27.0 |   |
| 18 | ImageNet | 33.7 | 40.3 | 57.3 | 46.9 | 27.1 | 41.1 | 14.9 |   |
| 18 | Self-supervised | 64.5 | 87.9 | 80.6 | 63.5 | 52.9 | 69.3 | 11.6 |   |
| 34 | Random | 32.1 | 12.1 | 59.6 | 47.1 | 24.0 | 35.0 | 29.3 |   |
| 34 | ImageNet | 39.3 | 47.1 | 63.5 | 41.5 | 31.2 | 44.5 | 15.4 |   |
| 34 | Self-supervised | 79.0 | 84.6 | 80.0 | 56.4 | 46.6 | 67.6 | 13.5 |   |
| 50 | Random | 29.1 | 27.7 | 68.7 | 23.1 | 22.8 | 34.3 | 29.1 |   |
| 50 | ImageNet | 43.1 | 48.3 | 70.0 | 38.4 | 32.4 | 46.4 | 12.0 |   |
| 50 | Self-supervised | 65.4 | 86.4 | 79.1 | 67.3 | 50.0 | 69.6 | 10.3 |   |
| 101 | Random | 21.0 | 6.8 | 58.8 | 26.3 | 22.0 | 27.2 | 2409.7 |   |
| 101 | ImageNet | 41.3 | 50.8 | 65.9 | 38.8 | 50.4 | 45.6 | 12.9 |   |
| 101 | Self-supervised | 70.6 | 86.5 | 79.5 | 68.6 | 50.3 | 71.1 | 10.6 |   |

**Table D.9**

Evaluating the impact of regression on task performance. We use images from one resolution for pretraining and evaluate the pretrained network on all available validation datasets. 10e, 20e, and 40e refer to 1 \mum/pixel, 0.50 \mum/pixel, and 0.25 \mum/pixel, respectively. We report F_1 scores averaged over five validation datasets for the classification task, mean L_1 difference between the ground truth and the predicted cellularity percentage for one dataset for regression, and average two F_1 scores for segmentation.

| Resolution | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Regression [Bqpc] | Regression [Bqpc] | Regression [Bqpc] | Segmentation [%] | Segmentation [%] | Segmentation [%] |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Resolution | BACH | NCT | BreakHis | Lymph | Gleason2019 | Average | Bqpc | Bqpc | BACH | Dp19 | Average |
| 10e | 62.8 | 69.0 | 78.6 | 50.6 | 43.9 | 61.0 | 10.9 |   | 37.8 | 75.1 | 56.5 |
| 20e | 54.6 | 65.7 | 74.2 | 65.4 | 42.7 | 60.5 | 9.9 |   | 42.4 | 72.8 | 57.6 |
| 40e | 66.1 | 73.8 | 73.3 | 69.2 | 44.4 | 65.4 | 9.4 |   | 42.4 | 81.6 | 62 |
| 10, 20, 40e | 65.1 | 74.0 | 75.3 | 76.9 | 43.7 | 67 | 9.3 |   | 42.2 | 83.9 | 63.0 |

**Table D.10**

The number of the number of images used for pretraining in the downstream task performance for classification, regression, and segmentation tasks. We report F_1 scores averaged over five validation datasets for the classification task, mean L_1 difference between the ground truth and the predicted cellularity percentage for one dataset for regression, and average two F_1 scores for segmentation.

| % of image | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Classification [%] | Regression [ L_1 ] | Regression [ L_1 ] | Regression [ L_1 ] | Segmentation [%] | Segmentation [%] | Segmentation [%] |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| % of image | BACH | NCT | BreakHis | Lymph | Gleason2019 | Average | Bqpc | Bqpc | BACH | Dp19 | Average |
| 0.01% | 65.1 | 77.6 | 75.4 | 62.8 | 51.6 | 66.5 | 8.5 |   | 43.4 | 81.9 | 62.7 |
| 0.1% | 77.7 | 85.0 | 78.6 | 75.2 | 53.0 | 73.9 | 7.8 |   | 61.0 | 84.5 | 72.8 |
| 1% | 80.0 | 90.9 | 76.3 | 82.5 | 55.3 | 77.0 | 6.8 |   | 55.7 | 85.9 | 70.8 |
| 10% | 87.0 | 89.9 | 75.4 | 90.1 | 53.1 | 79.1 | 6.7 |   | 65.8 | 86.2 | 73.5 |

**Table D.11**

Selecting suitable augmentations for self-supervised learning on digital histopathology tasks. Baseline augmentations consist of \epsilon (0^\circ, 90^\circ, 180^\circ, 270^\circ) image rotations, flips in each axis with 50% probability, Gaussian blurring, and light color jittering. Results are shown in metric F_1 score.

| Random crop | Augmentation intensity | BACH | NCT | BreakHis | Lymph | Gleason2019 | Average |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1% | None | 75.9 | 89 | 79.5 | 87.1 | 52.3 | 76.8 |
| 1% | Light | 81.7 | 93.6 | 82.7 | 88 | 52.3 | 79.7 |
| 1% | Medium | 84.4 | 94.4 | 84 | 88.2 | 54.8 | 80.5 |
| 1% | Heavy | 82.4 | 93.1 | 77.2 | 78.1 | 54.2 | 77.0 |
| 1% | None | 78 | 88.7 | 78.9 | 87.1 | 54.9 | 77.5 |
| 5% | Light | 82.4 | 94.2 | 80.8 | 88.1 | 53.8 | 79.9 |
| 5% | Medium | 85.3 |   |   |   |   |   |

---

<!-- Page 12 -->

O. Çiçe, T. Xu and A.L. Mural

Machine Learning with Applications 7 (2022) 100198

Table F.13

Datasets used for pretraining models.

| Dataset | Image patch datasets | Resolution | Staining | Number of patches | Image type |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| AML-Cytomorphology IAU (Daniel, Schwarz, Speckermann, & Marr, 2019) | Organ | 100x | Wright's stain | 13635 | Patch |
| andrejwawoznyk epi (Janowczyk & Madabhushi, 2016) | Breast | 20x | H&E | 125 | Patch |
| andrejwawoznyk lymphoma (Janowczyk & Madabhushi, 2016) | Various | 40x | H&E | 374 | Patch |
| andrejwawoznyk milcits (Janowczyk & Madabhushi, 2016) | Breast | 40x | H&E | 311 | Patch |
| andrejwawoznyk mclnc (Janowczyk & Madabhushi, 2016) | Breast | 40x | H&E | 142 | Patch |
| andrejwawoznyk tubule (Janowczyk & Madabhushi, 2016) | Colorectal | 40x | H&E | 85 | Patch |
| CNMC training data (Gehlot, Gupta, & Gupta, 2019) | Blood, bone | Unknown | H&E | 10661 | Patch |
| CNS-DC (Graham et al., 2019) | Brain | 40x | H&E | 41 | Patch |
| CRHISoPhenotypes (Sisinkunawattana et al., 2016) | Colorectal | 20x | H&E | 20 | Patch |
| Panmales Fold 1 (Gumper, Koonhanani, Best, Khuram, & Rajpoot, 2019) | Various | Various | H&E | 2656 | Patch |
| glas (Sisinkunawattana et al., 2016) | Colon | 20x | H&E | 165 | Patch |
| igcrf 2014 (Cagron, Calver, Atieh, Nasir, & Glauguen, 2014) | Breast | 20, 40x | H&E | 3975 | Patch |
| igcrf2019 (Sivardas-Chadid et al., 2019) | Breast | 20x | H&E | 100 | Patch |
| kyon2019 (Sivardas-Chadid et al., 2019) | Breast, colon, prostate | 40x | Anti CD3, CD8 | 441 | Patch |
| MBM (Gupta et al., 2019) | Various | 10x | Jeemer-Giemsa | 85 | Patch |
| MonSeq Training Data (Kumar et al., 2020) | Various | 40x | H&E | 30 | Patch |
| Prostate-MRI (Choyke, Turkey, Merino, & Wood, 2016) | Prostate | Unknown | H&E | 26 | Patch |
| ramba (Kumar et al., 2012) | Colon | Unknown | Various fluorescence | 61 | Patch |
| SNAP-BALL and MM (Gupta & Gupta, 2019) | Blood, bone | 100x | Jeemer-Giemsa | 61 | Patch |
| TNMC (Sisinkunawattana (Chak, Vyas, Kharik, & Fahien, 2018)) | Various | 40x | H&E | 50 | Patch |
| warwick beta cell dataset (Kuse, Wang, Kalasamvar, Khan, & Rajpoot, 2017) | Pancreas | 40x | H-DAB | 20 | Patch |
| DCDgrade (Bilhisani et al., 2020) | 16,20x,40x | 16,20x,40x | H&E | 922 | Patch |
| Whole-slide datasets | Whole-slide datasets | Whole-slide datasets | Whole-slide datasets | Whole-slide datasets | Whole-slide datasets |
| Dataset | Organ | Resolution | Staining | Number of WSIs | Image type |
| TGCA-BLA | Bladder | 40x | H&E | 469 | WSI |
| TGCA-BRCA | Breast | 20, 40x | H&E | 1987 | WSI |
| TGCA-CESC | Cervix | 40x | H&E | 327 | WSI |
| TGCA-COAD | Colon | 20, 40x | H&E | 983 | WSI |
| TGCA-ESCA | Esophagus | 20, 40x | H&E | 260 | WSI |
| TGCA-GEM | Brain | 20, 40x | H&E | 1193 | WSI |
| TGCA-HNSC | Head, neck | 20, 40x | H&E | 791 | WSI |
| TGCA-KICH | Kidney | 20, 40x | H&E | 275 | WSI |
| TGCA-KIRC | Renal | 20, 40x | H&E | 1656 | WSI |
| TGCA-KIRP | Renal | 20, 40x | H&E | 475 | WSI |
| TGCA-LGG | Brain | 40x | H&E | 728 | WSI |
| TGCA-LIHC | Liver | 20, 40x | H&E | 492 | WSI |
| TGCA-LUAD | Chest | 20, 40x | H&E | 1667 | WSI |
| TGCA-LUSC | Lung | 20, 40x | H&E | 1100 | WSI |
| TGCA-LOV | Ovary | 20, 40x | H&E | 1376 | WSI |
| TGCA-PAD | Prostate | 20, 40x | H&E | 736 | WSI |
| TGCA-PDLG | Various | 20, 40x | H&E | 364 | WSI |
| TGCA-SARC | Various | 20, 40x | H&E | 290 | WSI |
| TGCA-STAD | Somnath | 20, 40x | H&E | 771 | WSI |
| TGCA-THCA | Thyroid | 20, 40x | H&E | 639 | WSI |
| TGCA-UCEC | Uterus | 20, 40x | H&E | 805 | WSI |
| CPITAC-AML | Marrow, blood | 40x | PAS, Wright | 1023 | WSI |
| CPITAC-CRC-HC | Kidney | 20x | H&E | 783 | WSI |
| CPITAC-CML | Skin | 20x | H&E | 402 | WSI |
| CPITAC-GBM | Brain | 20x | H&E | 508 | WSI |
| CPITAC-HNSC | Head, neck | 20x | H&E | 580 | WSI |
| CPITAC-LUSC | Lung | 20x | H&E | 1073 | WSI |
| CPITAC-LUAD | Lung | 20x | H&E | 1065 | WSI |
| CPITAC-PDA | Pancreas | 20x | H&E | 557 | WSI |
| CPITAC-UCEC | Uterus | 20x | H&E | 887 | WSI |
| camelyon16 (Bachmani Bejoudi et al., 2017) | Lymph node | 40x | H&E | 400 | WSI |
| camelyon17 (Lijst et al., 2018) | Breast | 40x | H&E |   |   |

---

<!-- Page 13 -->

O. Giga, T. Xu and A.L. Marnel

Machine Learning with Applications 7 (2022) 100398

The split differs for this dataset, was 75000 patches in the training set, 25000 in validation, and 7180 in the test set. The test set comes from a related dataset called CRC-VAL-HE-7K, which was recommended for use as validation for the larger dataset. Images are taken from large stained colorectal cancer tissue slides. The data is split into nine classes: Adipose (AD), background (BACK), debris (DEB), lymphocytes (LYM), mucus (MUC), smooth muscle (MUS), normal colon mucosa (NORM), cancer-associated stroma (STR), and colorectal adenocarcinoma epithelium (TTR). The CRC-VAL-HE-7K dataset contains 24x4 pixel images (TMA) images from prostate biopsies. The segmentation labels for this dataset are the Gleason scores for each pixel in the image, ranging from 1 (healthy) to 5 (cancer).

For image segmentation, we used the following two datasets (BACH challenge dataset (Areta et al., 2019), and DigestPath2019 (Li et al., 2019). The BACH challenge dataset originates from part B of the challenge, and consists of 10 breast biopsy WSIs with 24x4 pixel segmentation masks. These whole-slides are split 5/2/3 for train/validation/test respectively. The segmentation labels are the same 4 classes in the classification dataset. Patches of size 1024 x 1024 pixels were extracted from each slide with a sliding window. The DigestPath2019 challenge dataset contains 250 5000 x 5000 pixel image patches taken from colonoscopy tissue slides. For our task, we resize each patch and it is corresponding pixel-level label image to 1024 x 1024. The segmentation masks are used for training and validation, and the images are used for inference, and the aim of this challenge is to use these segmentation labels to identify early-stage colon tumors.

For regression, we used the BreastPathQ dataset (Mhaskar, Peikari, Salminen, Panah, Nofech-Mooses, & Marnel, 2018). It consists of a total of 2579 patches with size 512 x 512 pixels extracted from 69 WSIs of Post-NAT-BRCA specimens (Peikari et al., 2017). BreastPathQ Images are labeled according to the percentage of cancer cells within each patch. The aim is to predict the percentage cellularity given an input image patch.

## Appendix D. Detailed results

### See Tables D-7-D-11.

## Appendix E. Comparison to other self-supervised methods

In this section, we compare SimCLR's performance to the earlier self-supervised techniques. We select each technique based on their recurrence. Each method uses the 1% of all available pretraining data. We reprocess the segmentation network used in our experiments (Yakovlevskiy, 2020) with the Resnet50 encoder, and optimize the image reconstruction objective with L_1 loss to train an autoencoder. We use an earlier self-supervised technique which is based on predicting the RGB channels of a grayscale image, and learning representations (colorization) (Zhang, Izhike, & Erwin, 2015), and use a more recent self-supervised method called CPv2 that encodes small patches from a larger image in a sliding window. Then, the aim is to predict encoded representations based on spatial proximity (patches extracted from an image that are spatially adjacent are considered more similar) (Hénaff et al., 2019) (see Table E.1.2).

## Appendix F. Datasets

### F.1. Pretraining datasets

#### See Table F.1.3.

## References

Alkhar, S., Peikari, M., Salminen, S., Panah, A. Y., Nofech-Mooses, S., & Marnel, A. L. (2019). Automated and manual quantification of tumor cellularity in digital slides for tumour burden assessment. Scientific Reports, 9(1), 14099.

Areta, G., Arzouq, T., Kwok, S., Chennamittay, S. S., Salfawi, M., Alex, V. et al. (2019). Bach: Grand challenge on histopathology image classification. MedRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.05.16.19110722

Bachmann, H., Hjelm, R. D., & Buchholz, W. (2019). Learning representations by maximizing mutual information across views. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 15504–15510).

Becker, J., & Schödl, M. (2018). Self-organizing neural networks that discovers surfaces in random-denoise images. Nature, 555(7656), 161–163.

Bhattacharya, S., & Chakraborty, S. (2019). A histopathological image dataset for grading breast invasive ductal carcinomas. Informatica in Medicine, 10(1), 100017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infmed.2019.100017

Campbell, G., Hanna, M., Gensler, L., Mirzafar, A., Silva, V., Busam, K. J., Chen, J. K. J., et al. (2019). A large-scale, multi-institutional, weakly supervised deep learning on whole slide images. Nature Medicine, 25, 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-019-0479-1

Campbell, G., Hanna, M. G., Gensler, L., Mirafra, A., Wernick Krauss Silva, V., Busam, K. J., et al. (2019). Clinical-grade computational pathology using weakly supervised deep learning. Nature Medicine, 25(10), 1200–1206. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-019-0500-1

Caporaso, M., & Caporaso, M. (2019). bioRxiv preprint arXiv:1905.00714.

Chen, J. K. J., & Gensler, L. (2019). bioRxiv preprint arXiv:1904.12059. ATISA-MIT-ATIPA 14 grand challenge. https://mitosis.atipa-14.grand-challenge.org/

Chen, J. K. J., & Gensler, L. (2019). bioRxiv preprint arXiv:1904.12059. Unsupervised transfer learning via multi-scale convolutional sparse coding for biomedical applications. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 40(5), 1182–1194.

Chen, J. K. J., & Gensler, L. (2019). bioRxiv preprint arXiv:1904.12059. A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.00759.

Chen, J. K. J., & Gensler, L. (2019). bioRxiv preprint arXiv:1904.12059. Histograms for self-supervised models of strong semi-supervised learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.00759.

Choyke, P., Turkley, B., Pinto, P., Merino, M., & Wood, A. (2016). Prostate-MRI dataset. http://doi.org/10.7973/HR.TC1A.2016.6046GUD.

Claassen, J. A., & Klemm, J. (2017). bioRxiv preprint arXiv:1705.02121. Overcoming the limitations of patch-based learning to detect cancer in whole slide images. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1–11.

Dosovitskiy, A., Springenberg, J. T., Riedmiller, M., & Brox, T. (2014). Discriminative unsupervised feature learning with convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 766–774).

Etheomani Bejroun, B., Vera, M., Johannes van Driel, P., van Ginneken, B., Karssemeier, N., Lijnen, N., Lijnen, G., & van Maas, W. (2018). A deep learning framework for detection of lymph node metastases in women with breast cancer. JAMA, 318(23), 2199–2120. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2017.14888

Günther, J., Kosselmann, P. A., & Bertsch, B. (2019). bioRxiv preprint arXiv:1905.00778.

Nukunukun, A., and Gupta, R. (2019). Dataset for needle instance segmentation and histology image classification in Europe. Medical Image Analysis, 59, 1–19.

Gehlot, S., Gupta, A., & Gupta, R. (2019). All challenge dataset of ISBI 2019. http://www.isbi.org/2019/challenge-dataset/

Gildaris, S., Singh, P., & Komodakis, N. (2018). Unsupervised representation learning by predicting image rotations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07728.

Ghoshal, S., & Qi, D. (2019). bioRxiv preprint arXiv:1905.00778. Learning for digital pathology. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.00819.

Ghoshal, S., Qi, D., & Gildaris, S. (2019). A, Tang, Y. W., Kwok, J. T., et al. (2019). Hove-net: Simultaneous segmentation and classification of nuclei in multi-tissue histology images. Medical Image Analysis, 58, 10411063. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2019.10411063

Gill, J. A., Brody, P., Altheff, J., Talke, C., Richemond, P. H., Buchkayeva, E., et al. (2020). Boosting your own latent: A new approach to self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.00759.

Gupta, A. (2018). MMIM.SR.BAL: Microscopic images of multi-type myeloma. http://doi.org/10.7910/DN.XXX7ST.

Gupta, A., & Gildaris, S. (2019). bioRxiv preprint arXiv:1905.00778. White blood cell detection of BAL and MMF for stain normalization. https://doi.org/10.7973/rxiv.2019.021678

He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, H., & Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual learning for image recognition. In 2016 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 9729–9738).

He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, H., & Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual learning for image recognition. In 2016 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 778–788). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.66

Hénaff, O. J., Srinivas, A., De Feuw, J., Razavi, A., Doersch, C

---

<!-- Page 14 -->

O. Giga, T. Xu and A.L. Mangel

Machine Learning with Applications J. of Data 2022, 10019

Hu, B., Tang, Y., Eric, L., Chang, C., Fan, Y., Lai, M., et al. (2018). Unsupervised learning for cell-level visual representation in histopathology images with generative adversarial networks. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 23(3), 1313–1328.

Jack, K. L., Powers, W., Marick, R., and Fabian, B. (2018). Segmentation of nuclei in histology images by deep regression of the distance map. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/2576.175282. We would like to thank Ligne Nationale centre de Cancer for funding my PhD.

Janowski, B., and Malsbush, A. (2016). Deep learning for digital pathology image analysis: A comprehensive tutorial with selected use cases. Journal of Digital Pathology, 1(1), 1–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s40441-016-00892_0.

Kathryn, J. N., Halama, N., et al. (2018). 100,000 histological images of human colorectal cancer and healthy tissue. http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1214456. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1214456.

Karimi, R., and Ba, J. (2013). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.

Kumar, N., Ashwina, S. (2018). Machine learning methods for histopathological image analysis. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal, 16, 34–42.

Kumar, N., Verma, R., Anand, D., Zhou, Y., Order, O. F., Tsoungens, E., et al. (2020). A deep learning-based method for histological image classification. Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology, 11, 395. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fcb.2019.07.028.

Kumar, N., Verma, R., Ashwina, S., Kumar, N., Zhou, Y., Ashwina, S., et al. (2019). Local isotropic phase symmetry measure for detection of cell bodies and lymphocytes. Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology, 10, 529. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fcels.2019.00529.

Li, J., Yang, S., Huang, X., Du, Q., Yang, X., Hu, Z., et al. (2019). Signal ring correlation detection with a semi-supervised learning framework. In International conference on computer vision (pp. 842–854). Springer.

Lijten, G., Bandt, P., Eshahani Bejnordi, B., Geestink, O., Balakrishnan, M., Bult, P., et al. (2019). 299 brain cancer histology images of breast cancer patients: the CANCER dataset. Gigascience, 7(6), gey001.

Mirali, A. S., Nofeez-Moues, S., Salama, S., Akbar, S., & Pekar, M. (2019). Assessment of residual breast cancer pathology after neoadjuvant chemotherapy using digital pathology. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijcm1204.0478 [Data set].

Mirali, A. S., Pekar, M., Salama, S., Akbar, S., & Kater, C. (2019). A single-cell morphological dataset of leukocytes from AML patients and non-malignant controls. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/2019.03.05.290947.

Mehra, R., et al. (2018). Breast cancer histology image classification: Training from scratch or transfer learning? IJCV, 8(4), 247–254.

Mildorov, T., Chen, K., Geras, G., & Doni, J. (2013). Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space. arxiv.org/abs/1301.3781.

Milora, E., Har, S., Karimi, D., Bult, P., & Pekar, M. (2018). Self-supervised learning of invariant representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 670–679). IEEE.

Nir, E., Her, S., Karimi, D., Bult, P., Skinner, B. P., & Tavassoli, P., et al. (2018). Automatic grading of prostate cancer in digitized histopathology images: Learning from multiple experts. Medical Image Analysis, 50, 167–180. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2018.09.005. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361858718307497.

Norouzi, M., & Favaro, P. (2016). Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw puzzle. In European conference on computer vision (pp. 69–84).

Olav, N., Chen, W., Edley, G., Macera, T., Shumil, L., Jaffe, E., et al. (2010). Automatic classification of lymphoma images with transform-based global features. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 14 (16). http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TITB.2010.2056955.

Pelkari, M., Salama, S., Nofeez-Moues, S., & Marel, A. L. (2017). Automatic cellularity assessment from post-treated breast surgical specimens. Cytometry Part A, 9(11), 1078–1087.

Pelkari, M., Salama, S., Nofeez-Moues, S., & Marel, A. L. (2018). A cluster-threshold semi-supervised learning approach for pathology image classification. Scientific Reports, 8(1), 1–13.

Raza, S., e, A., Humayun, A., Abubana, S., Narkhsevar, T., Epstein, D., Khan, M., et al. (2012). Ramdas: Robust alignment of multi-scale bioimages. Proc One, 7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/317171.

Ramnarayan, O., Pashar, P., & Bava, T. (2013). Unsupervised networks for biomedical image segmentation. In International conference on medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention (pp. 234–241). Springer.

Roux, E., Racoceanu, M., Lemont, N., Kulikova, M., Irshad, H., Klossa, J., et al. (2013). Miniscope detection in breast cancer histological images an ICPV 2012 contest. Journal of Pathology Informatics, 15(1), 1–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.21253/S2013-3520-13-0005.

Rusnakovich, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Sathesh, S., Ma, S., et al. (2015). A deep learning architecture for histological image segmentation on scale of Computer Vision (ICCV), 1123–2152. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-051-081-9.

Schödl, F., Kalochkeris, D., & Phillips, R. (2016). Feature: A unified embedding for face recognition and clustering. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 815–822). IEEE.

Singh, S., Kaur, S., Kaur, J., P. Y., Chen, H., Qi, X., Heng, P.-A., Guo, Y. B., et al. (2016). Gland segmentation in colon histology images: The glass challenge contest. arxiv.org/abs/1607.02773.

Sirinukwasutana, K., Raza, S. E., Tang, Y., Sneed, D. R., R. C., Croy, I. A., & Rajpoot, N. M. (2016). Locally sensitive deep learning for detection and classification of nuclei in histology images. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 13, 1196–1206. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TMBME.2552003.

Spitschitz, A., & Pekar, M. (2018). A simple and effective method for segmentation of breast cancer histological image classification. Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 65(1), 15300029.

Svidenska-Chudaj, T., Pinckners, H., van Rijnhoven, K., Balkenhol, M., Melnikova, M., Geessink, O., et al. (2019). Learning to detect lymphocytes in immunohistochemistry with deep learning. Medical Image Analysis, 56, Article 101547. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2019.101547.

Tajbakhsh, N., Shin, J. Y., Gunda, S. R., Hurst, R. T., Kendal, C. B., Gotway, M. B., et al. (2016). Convolutional neural networks for medical image analysis: Full training or fine-tuning? IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 35(5), 1299–1312.

Tarvainen, A., & Valpola, H. (2017). Mean teachers are better role models: Weight-averaged teacher networks improve semi-supervised learning results. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 1195–1204).

Teller, D., Lipton, G., van der Laak, C., & Gangyi, J. (2019). Neural image compression for gigapixel histopathology image analysis. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence.

Tian, Y., Krishnan, D., & Sola, P. (2019). Contrastive multiview coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08490.

Veta, M., Hong, Y., Jathushankar, N., Bejnordi, B. E., Beca, P., Wollmann, T., et al. (2019). Predicting breast tumor proliferation from whole-slide images: The TUPAC16 challenge. Medical Image Analysis, 54, 111–121. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2019.02.012.

Xu, Z., Xiong, Y., Yu, S., & Lin, D. (2018). Unsupervised feature learning via non-parametric instance-level discrimination. arxiv.org/abs/1805.01778.

Xu, J., Xiang, L., Liu, Q., Gilmore, H., Wang, J., Tang, J., et al. (2015). Stacked spine autoencoder (SSAE) for nuclei detection on breast cancer histopathology images. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 35(1), 119–130.

Yakubovskiy, P. (2020). Segmentation models pytorch.

Yan, Y., Gilman, I., & Ginsburg, R. (2017). Large batch training of convolutional networks. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 14(3).

Yan, Y., Li, J., Hodel, S., Hees, J., Kumar, S., & Ginsburg, R. (2019). Large batch optimization for deep learning